EIRA | Interoperable Europe Portal
Skip to main content
EIRA
Subscribe to this solution
Share Solution reuse
Interoperability Architecture Solutions
101 members
Topics:
Collaboration
Digital government
Tools
ICT
Reusable Software Components
Standardisation
Bookmark
Like (5)
Welcome
What is the European Interoperability Reference Architecture (EIRA©)?
For what? You are working on the...
For whom? You are a...
EIRA©'s value proposition
Key concepts to understand EIRA©
The EIRA© is a reference architecture
The EIRA© requires interoperability enablers
The EIRA© Validator
Main characteristics of the EIRA©
Benefits of the EIRA©
Find out more
Releases
What is the European Interoperability Reference Architecture (EIRA©)?
A reference architecture is a blueprint/template that provides a
recommended framework
for designing and implementing systems.
EIRA©
is a
quality assurance specification
that provides
guidelines
on how to analyse and design a
Digital Public Service
- unit of analysis of EIRA© - so that is
interoperable by design
- focus of EIRA©.
The
latest release of EIRA© is the
v7.0.0
👉 Explore the web version of the EIRA model
EIRA©
is formed by different Architecture Building Blocks (ABBs), informing key
requirements and capabilities
to consider to ensure interoperability, covering all interoperability
views defined in the European Interoperability Framework (EIF)
:
Legal View
– This includes the most salient public policy development aspects, ensuring compliance with legislation when implementing a Digital Public Service.
Organisational View
– This focuses on organisational and governance aspects, detailing the stakeholders involved and capabilities and business services achieved with the Digital Public Service
Semantic View
– This addresses how data and information are structured and shared to enable seamless communication between systems.
Technical Application View
– This covers the application of technical requirements, ensuring that digital solutions consider technical aspects for the end-to-end analysis.
Technical Infrastructure View
– Contains the most salient infrastructure services that need to be considered to support technical aspects for the infrastructure (i.e. computing hosting, networking, and data hosting) of Digital Solutions.
For what? You are working on the...
Analysis
of Requirements of an Interoperable Solution (Digital Public Service incl.) use case
Design
of a Solution for Target Interoperable Solution (Digital Public Service incl.) use case
For whom? You are a...
Business analyst
Enterprise architect
Solution architect
Working in the implementation of digital public services in a specific policy domain or in cross-domain infrastructure services.
EIRA©'s value proposition
Check
EIRA©'s value proposition
detailing how this
quality assurance specification
brings value to different
use cases
for support to Digital Public Services and
target profiles
.
Key concepts to understand EIRA©
The EIRA© is a reference architecture
This means that the EIRA© is a blueprint/template that provides a
recommended framework
for designing and implementing systems. This framework entails:
Guidance
for creating solutions that meet specific needs or objectives.
Best practices, standards, and guidelines
to create systems that are efficient, scalable, and interoperable.
A common language and approach for technology development and deployment that
reduces complexity and costs
.
This way, the EIRA© operates as a checklist for
quality assurance
: it ensures quality during the analysis and solution design stages.
The EIRA© requires interoperability enablers
Interoperability enablers
refer to the critical success factors that
facilitate the seamless integration, communication, and collaboration between different systems
,
applications or (digital) services
, ensuring diverse technologies work together harmoniously for improved efficiency and innovation.
The implementation of the EIRA©
key interoperability enablers is a critical condition
to allow and ensure that Digital Public Services are interoperable, as shown in the image:
The EIRA© Validator
The
EIRA© Validator
allows users to
validate ArchiMate® models against the EIRA©
. It is implemented through the
Interoperability TestBed
, which is is a service offered by the European Commission’s DIGIT to facilitate the conformance testing of IT systems. More information on the Interoperability Test Bed and its latest release is available
here
.
The EIRA© Validator is available
here
.
The set of
Business Rules
for the EIRA© and the eGovERA© can be found in the following links:
The EIRA© Validator Rules
The eGovERA© Validator Rules
Main characteristics of the EIRA©
Common terminology to achieve coordination:
Common understanding of the most salient ABBs needed to build interoperable Digital Public Services.
Reference architecture for delivering Digital Public Services:
A framework to categorise (re)usable Solution Building Blocks (SBBs) of an eGovernment solution.
Technology- and product-neutral and service-oriented architecture (SOA) style:
A service-oriented architecture style and promotion of ArchiMate® as a modelling language.
Alignment with the EIF and the TOGAF®:
The EIRA© views correspond to the interoperability levels in the EIF. Moreover, the EIRA© reuses terminology and paradigms from TOGAF® (i.e., architecture patterns, building blocks and views).
Benefits of the EIRA©
Development of
more interoperable e-Government solutions
.
Cost-savings
due to better assessment of solution portfolios.
Cost-savings
via increased findability.
Machine readability
.
Facilitated validation
using the EIRA
©
and the eGovERA
©
validator.
Integration with
the European Library of Architecture Principles
(
ELAP
) EIRA
©
Library of Interoperability Specifications (
ELIS
).
Find out more
Check out
these further notions
about the EIRA
©
to know more!
Releases
Release history
Report abusive content