What are the Large Scale Pilot Projects - EU Digital Identity Wallet -
EU Digital Identity Wallet
Edit space details
Pages
Blog
Page tree
Browse pages
Configure
Space tools
A
t
tachments (27)
Page History
Page Information
Resolved comments
View in Hierarchy
View Source
Export to Word
Page Labels
Attachment Labels
Hide Inline Comments
Jira links
What are the Large Scale Pilot Projects
Created by
Georgios Chatzitheodoridis
, last updated by
Georgios CHATZITHEODORIDIS
on
Jul 22, 2026
10 minute read
PILOT PROJECTS
What are the
Large Scale
Pilots
Large Scale Pilots are test driving the specifications of EU Digital Identity Wallets in a wide range of use cases, before their roll-out to Member States. Learn more about who they are and
					the work they are doing.
The
Large Scale Pilots
are testing the
use cases
6
Large Scale Pilot projects
are testing the EU Digital Identity Wallet before its roll-out to Member States. Two Large Scale Pilots are currently active, with four
								having concluded their work.
+11
every-day
use cases
for the EU Digital Identity Wallet are being
tested by the Large Scale Pilots.
550
private companies and public authorities
across 26 Member States, as well as Norway, Iceland, and Ukraine, are
participating in the Large Scale Pilots.
Meet the 2 new
Large Scale Pilots
Two new EU co-funded Consortia began in 2025. They gather Member States, public authorities, SMEs, major European enterprises and global leaders in the digital identity ecosystem.
They seek to encourage public and private sector collaboration while developing the standards and technical documentation needed to make the EUDI ecosystem secure and interoperable.
APTITUDE
APTITUDE will test EUDI Wallets across a wide range of use cases, including travel and mobile vehicle registration certificates. They will demonstrate the interoperability, usability, and
						scalability of EUDI Wallets while actively promoting the benefits of the ecosystem.
Visit APTITUDE
Subscribe newsletter
WE BUILD Consortium
WE BUILD Consortium is focusing on business and payment use cases that streamline processes for business to business (B2B), business to government (B2G) and business to consumer (B2C)
						interactions.
Visit WE BUILD Consortium
Subscribe newsletter
Discover the use cases
being tested in the Large Scale Pilots
Each Pilot is testing EU Digital Identity Wallets in a variety of everyday scenarios relevant to Europeans.
The results of their tests will be shared to further improve security, interoperability, and the design of the wallets.
Discover how the use cases being tested will simplify your day-to-day life.
Tickets and Check-in
Use your wallet to store and present tickets, like for public transportation, and check-in to hotels and other services.
Mobile Vehicle Registration Certificate (mVRC)
Keep your vehicle certification safe in your wallet, ready to present whenever it’s needed.
Digital Travel Credentials
Digital versions of credentials like passports, ready to be used.
Payments and Banking
Banks will be enabled to use wallets to enact strong customer authentication.
Payments
Enabling B2B and B2G transactions.
Business
Enabling businesses to streamline processes and reduce costs by using wallets.
Learn more about the use cases
Tickets and Check-in
Use your wallet to store and present tickets, like for public transportation, and check-in to hotels and other services.
Mobile Vehicle Registration Certificate (mVRC)
Keep your vehicle certification safe in your wallet, ready to present whenever it’s needed.
Digital Travel Credentials
Digital versions of credentials like passports, ready to be used.
Payments and Banking
Banks will be enabled to use wallets to enact strong customer authentication.
Payments
Enabling B2B and B2G transactions.
Business
Enabling businesses to streamline processes and reduce costs by using wallets.
Learn more about the use cases
Explore the work of the previous
Large Scale Pilots
In 2022 the Digital Europe Programme — an EU funding programme focused on bringing digital technology to businesses, citizens and public administrations — put out a call to launch Pilot
					projects for the EU Digital Identity Wallet. Four Large Scale Pilot projects began in April 2023, with more to come in the future.
Pilots for European Digital Identity Wallet
POTENTIAL aims to foster innovation, collaboration and growth in six digital identity sectors — governmental services, banking, telecommunications, mobile driving licenses, electronic
						signatures, and health.
Explore Potential's deliverables
EU Digital Wallet Consortium
The EU Digital Wallet Consortium (EWC) is a joint effort to successfully leverage the benefits of the proposed EU digital identity in the form of Digital Travel Credentials across the
						Member States. The EWC intends to build on the reference wallet application to enable a use case focused on Digital Travel Credentials.
Explore EWC's deliverables
Digital Credentials for Europe
DC4EU provides tangible support to the public and private sectors in the educational and social security sectors by deploying and accessing state-of-the-art trans-European interoperable
						digital service infrastructures and their integration in a cross-border trust framework.
Explore DC4EU's deliverables
NOBID Consortium
NOBID is a set of Nordic and Baltic countries who, together with Italy and Germany, will pilot the use of the EU Digital Identity Wallet for the authorisation of payments for products and
						services by the wallet user.
Explore NOBID's deliverables
The European Commission, Member States and the Large Scale Pilots are working together to create the
Wallet Toolbox
European Commission
The European Commission, and Member States, are together providing the specifications and guidelines needed to build the EU Digital Identity Wallet with
the EU Digital Identity Wallet Toolbox.
Large Scale Pilots
The Large Scale Pilots are building on the specifications detailed in the Toolbox and the Reference Implementation, and will pilot and test the wallet in a variety of everyday use cases.
						Feedback from the Pilot projects will inform the next versions of the Toolbox.
Member States
The end result of this process will be a well-tested open code base for the wallet, that will be used by Member States to build their own wallets.
Discover the technical specifications
What are EU Digital Identity Wallets
Safe and easy digital identification for everyone in Europe.
Discover the wallet
What are EU Digital Identity Wallets
Safe and easy digital identification for everyone in Europe.
Discover the wallet
No labels
Overview
Content Tools
Powered by a free
Atlassian Confluence Open Source Project License
granted to EC DIGIT.
Evaluate Confluence today
.
Powered by
Atlassian Confluence
9.2.23
Printed by Atlassian Confluence 9.2.23
Report a bug
Atlassian News
Atlassian
{"serverDuration": 82, "requestCorrelationId": "86625dc2e8e14cea"}