Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Rules 2024 | Version: 2 (en)
Skip to main content
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Rules 2024
Version:
2
URL:
https://standards.digital.govt.nz/nz/dia-distfr/2/en/
Source Document
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Rules 2024
This document is the current consolidated version of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Rules 2024 produced by the Department of Internal Affairs as a reference document only. It is compiled from the rules made by the Minister for Digitising Government.
Copies of the rules made by the Minister for Digitising Government were notified in the New Zealand Gazette and are available from the Department of Internal Affairs, including at the website:
https://www.dia.govt.nz/Trust-Framework.
Contact email:
distf@dia.govt.nz
Pursuant to
section 18 of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act 2023
, on the recommendation of the Trust Framework Board and after consultation in accordance with section 21 of that Act, the Minister for Digitising Government makes the following rules.
Part 1: Preliminary
Title
These rules are the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Rules 2024.
Commencement
These rules come into force on 24 July 2025.
Application
These rules apply to Trust Framework providers and the accredited services they provide.
Interpretation
In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires –
accredited digital identity service
or
accredited service
has the same meaning as in
section 5 of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act 2023
.
attribute
means a piece of information that describes something about an Entity (for example, an individual’s name, address and whether they are resident in a particular place are all attributes about the individual).
agent
means an individual who initiates a transaction on behalf of another individual or organisation through an established authority.
authentication
means the process for establishing that an authenticator is genuine or as represented.
authentication assurance
means robustness of the process to ensure an authenticator remains solely in control of its holder.
authenticator
means information or another thing, for example a password, a personal identification number, or a fingerprint, that—
is known to, or possessed or controlled by, a person; and
is bound or otherwise linked to the person during an interaction with a service; and
can be used by the person during subsequent interactions with the service to prove that they are the same person.
authentication service
means a digital identity service that enables a person to use an authenticator to access a service, for example a log-in service or a 2–factor authentication service.
bind
in relation to personal or organisational information, means to link securely to the correct individual or organisation by means of 1 or more checks that the information relates to that particular individual or organisation.
binding assurance
means robustness of the process to bind a person or organisation to their information and to an authenticator or both to their information and to an authenticator.
binding service
means a digital identity service that binds personal or organisational information.
credential
means a digital record (for example a digital vaccination record) that—
combines an authenticator and bound personal or organisational information; and
a relying party or another person can rely on without verifying the information.
credential service
means a digital identity service that creates a reusable credential.
derived value
or
derived assertion
or
derived predicate
means a value deduced or inferred from information in a credential.
digital identity service
has the meaning given in
section 10 of Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act 2023
.
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework
or the
Trust Framework
means the legal framework established by the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act 2023 to regulate the provision of digital identity services for transactions between individuals and organisations.
digital identity system
means an interconnected system for the exchange and verification of entities’ attributes, involving:
Trust Framework providers; and
users; and
relying parties.
entity
means something that has separate and distinct existence and that can be identified in a particular context, for example:
an individual; or
an organisation.
facilitation
means the processes that support users to claim, hold and manage their credentials, and present their credentials to relying parties.
facilitation mechanism
means a product that can facilitate the presentation of 1 or more credentials (fully or partially) in response to a request from a relying party.
Examples include digital wallets.
facilitation service
means a digital identity service that enables a person to present a credential to a relying party.
flash pass
means a method used by a relying party to consume a credential by viewing human-readable information rendered on the user’s facilitation mechanism without cryptographic verification.
identification management
has the same meaning as in
section 20(1) of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act 2023
.
identification standards
mean the New Zealand Identification Standards published by the Department of Internal Affairs.
information and data management
has the same meaning as in
section 20(1) of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act 2023
.
information assurance
means the robustness of the process to establish the quality and accuracy of a person’s or organisation’s information.
information service
means a service that provides—
personal or organisational information; and
a level of assurance as to the accuracy of that information.
level of assurance
means an indicator of the robustness of the identification processes undertaken to assure information, authenticators and the connections between these and a person or an organisation.
metadata
means the type of data describing context, content and structure of data and its management through time.
New Zealand Information Security Manual
or
NZISM
means the New Zealand Government’s manual on information governance, assurance, and information systems security. Government Chief Information Security Officer develops and maintains the NZISM, through the National Cyber Security Centre.
organisation
has the same meaning as in
section 5 of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act
.
organisational information
means information relating to a particular organisation.
participants
has the same meaning as in
section 11 of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act 2023
.
personal information
has the meaning as in
section 7(1) of the Privacy Act 2020
.
personal or organisational information means –
information that describes the identity of an individual or organisation:
other information about that individual or organisation.
portability
means the capability to move credentials from one facilitation mechanism to another.
privacy and confidentiality
has the same meaning as in
section 20(1) of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act 2023
. These requirements are in addition to requirements under
the Privacy Act 2020
, which must also be met.
relying party
means an individual who, or an organisation that, relies on personal or organisational information shared, in a transaction with a user, through 1 or more digital identity services.
revocation
means the act of invalidating a credential before its expiration date.
security and risk
has the same meanings under as in
section 20(1) of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act 2023
.
security management plan
means a plan of action that an organisation uses to address its security risk, based on the context in which the organisation operates and through a threat and risk review.
security risk
means any event that could result in the compromise, loss of integrity or unavailability of information or resources, or the deliberate harm to people measured in terms of its probability and consequences.
security risk assessment
means an activity undertaken to assess the security controls for a system and its environment to determine if they have been implemented correctly and are operating as intended.
server retrieval
means a method of data retrieval that utilises a connection between a verifier and the credential issuing service.
sharing and facilitation
has the same meanings under as in
section 20(1) of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act 2023
.
subject
means a person or an organisation that is the focus of personal or organisational information.
TF Authority or Authority
means the authority established under
section 58 of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act 2023
.
TF Board or Board
means the board established under
section 43 of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework 2023
.
TF provider or Trust Framework provider
has the same meaning as in
section 5 of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act 2023
.
TF register or Trust Framework register
has the same meaning as in
section 5 of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act 2023
.
transaction
means a transaction whether online or otherwise.
user
means an individual who—
shares personal or organisational information, in a transaction with a relying party, through 1 or more accredited digital identity services; and
does so for themselves or on behalf of another individual or an organisation.
validity
in relation to a credential, means confirmation of active status or revocation status.
verifier
means system or tool which a relying party may use to check the validity of a credential.
Part 2: Service rules
Information service
A Trust Framework provider of an information service must provide attributes with a level of information assurance established in accordance with the
section 21 of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations
under the Identification Standards.
Binding service
A Trust Framework provider of a binding service must undertake entity binding in accordance with the
Binding Assurance Standard
under the Identification Standards.
Authentication service
A Trust Framework provider of an authentication service must undertake authentication assurance in accordance with the
Authentication Assurance Standard
under the Identification Standards.
Credential service
All credentials issued by Trust Framework providers of a credential service must conform with the controls set out in the
Federation Assurance Standard
- Requirements for Credential Providers establishing Credentials under the Identification Standards.
All credentials issued must comply with one of the following:
W3C Verifiable Credential Data Model (latest version holding recommended status); or
ISO 18013-5: Mobile driving licence (mDL) application (latest published version); or
ISO 23220 series: Cards and security devices for personal identification – Building blocks for identity management via mobile devices (latest published versions).
All Trust Framework providers of credential services must provide a means to revoke a credential issued by the provider.
Users must be able to revoke a credential issued to them.
Subjects must be able to revoke a credential containing their personal information, or organisational information.
Agents acting on behalf of a subject must be able to revoke a credential containing the personal or organisational information of that subject.
Revocation must occur as soon as practicable after a request is made by the user, subject or agent.
All credentials must be verifiable for validity by relying parties.
Credential verification activity must not be tracked or correlated by the Trust Framework providers.
All Trust Framework providers of credential services must publish the standards and formats their service supports on a publicly available website.
Facilitation service
Trust Framework providers of facilitation services must establish facilitation mechanisms in accordance with the
Federation Assurance Standard
- Requirements for Facilitation Providers establishing facilitation mechanisms under the Identification Standards.
Facilitation mechanisms must be able to hold credentials of at least one of the credential formats listed in Rule 8(2).
Users must be enabled to remove a credential from a facilitation mechanism at any time.
Trust Framework providers of facilitation services must present credentials in accordance with the
Federation Assurance Standard
- Requirements for the presentation of Credentials by Facilitation Providers under the Identification Standards.
All credential presentations must comply with one of the following:
for W3C complying credentials as per Rule 8(2)(a):
W3C Verifiable Credential Data Model (latest version holding recommended status); or
for ISO 18013 complying credentials as per Rule 8(2)(b):
ISO 18013-5: Mobile driving licence (mDL) application (latest published version) if the presentation is in person; or
ISO 18013-7: Mobile driving licence (mDL) add-on functions (latest published version) if the presentation is not in person.
for ISO 23220 complying credentials as per Rule 8(2)(c):
an appropriate presentation standard published in the ISO 23220 series; or
ISO 18013-5: Mobile driving licence (mDL) application (latest published version) if the presentation is in person; or
ISO 18013-7: Mobile driving licence (mDL) add-on functions (latest published version) if the presentation is not in person.
Credential presentation must only present attributes the user has authorised to present.
All Trust Framework providers of facilitation services must publish the standards their service supports on a publicly available website.
Facilitation mechanisms must not allow server retrieval of any data contained in a credential presentation, at the time of the presentation.
Facilitation mechanisms should not enable flash pass credential presentations.
Part 3: Authorisation rules
Authorisation rules
All Trust Framework providers must receive valid authorisation before undertaking any accredited digital identity service transaction.
An authorisation is considered valid if:
The authorisation is provided by a user permitted to authorise the accredited digital identity service to be undertaken; and
The user has been informed about what they are authorising; and
The Trust Framework provider who sought the authorisation has recorded the details of the authorisation.
Trust Framework providers may consider a user is permitted to authorise an accredited digital identity service transaction if:
The subject is the user providing the authorisation themselves; or
The subject is an individual or organisation for whom the user has authority to act on behalf of.
Notwithstanding rule 10(3), only the user a credential is issued to may authorise the presentation of that credential.
Trust Framework providers must not require the user to provide authorisation, consent or permission for any activity not directly related to completing the accredited digital identity service being undertaken.
All Trust Framework providers must record information to support an investigation into the activity, including in the event the authorisation is found to be fraudulently provided.
Informed authorisations
Trust Framework providers requesting an authorisation for undertaking an information, binding, or authentication service must inform the user the following at the time of requesting authorisation:
the accredited digital identity service that will be undertaken; and
the personal or organisational information that will be collected or used to undertake the service; and
the organisations carrying out each service, including their accreditation status; and
if personal or organisational information and related data may be stored and/or processed outside of New Zealand.
Trust Framework providers requesting an authorisation to undertake a credential service must inform the user of the following at the time of requesting authorisation:
the accredited digital identity service that will be undertaken; and
the personal or organisational information that will be collected or used to undertake the service; and
the organisations carrying out each service, including their accreditation status; and
the details of the credential that will be established; and
the terms of use for the credential; and
if personal or organisational information and related data may be stored and processed outside of New Zealand; and
when the credential will be established and available for the user; and
how to report misuse of the credential; and
how to cancel or revoke the credential from further use.
Trust Framework providers requesting an authorisation to undertake a facilitation service to establish a facilitation mechanism must inform the user of the following at the time of requesting authorisation:
the personal or organisational information that will be collected or used to undertake the service; and
the terms of use for the facilitation mechanism; and
a warning about sharing their information only to relying parties they know, and other obligations for keeping their information safe; and
if personal or organisational information and related data may be stored and/or processed outside of New Zealand; and
when the facilitation mechanism will be established and available for the user; and
how to deactivate or delete a facilitation mechanism to prevent further use of it; and
how to report any misuse of a facilitation mechanism.
When a user initiates presentation of 1 or more credentials (fully or partially), the facilitation mechanism must notify the user of all the following:
the personal or organisational information to be presented; and
the relying party to whom the personal or organisational information is being presented, where not being presented in-person.
Part 4: Privacy rules
Minimising privacy risks
All Trust Framework providers must comply with their obligations under
the Privacy Act 2020
, including the Information Privacy Principles in that Act.
All Trust Framework providers must complete a privacy impact assessment for the accredited digital identity service they provide.
The privacy impact assessment must include all the following:
a detailed service description; and
information already held and new information to be collected; and
the purpose for which the information is collected; and
a map of the movement of information between people, systems and processes within the organisation; and
how information will be stored, accessed, used, and disposed of by the Trust Framework provider; and
an independent analysis of mitigations for all risks identified.
All Trust Framework providers must review the privacy impact assessment at the earlier of the following:
two years from the previous review; or
when there is a change to the accredited digital identity service.
All Trust Framework providers must have a designated individual who is responsible for:
overseeing the privacy impact assessment process and review; and
ensuring compliance with all applicable laws, regulations, and codes; and
managing privacy policies; and
monitoring privacy risks and compliance.
All Trust Framework providers must ensure personnel receive regular training on privacy policies including:
lawful purposes and uses for personal and organisational information collected and held by the Trust Framework provider; and
processes to amend or update a user’s personal or organisational information when requested by that user; and
processes regarding storage, use and disposal of information; and
awareness of privacy complaints and incidents procedures.
All Trust Framework providers must ensure personnel receive communications regarding any changes to privacy policies and processes.
All Trust Framework providers must maintain a documented privacy incident response plan which includes:
clearly assign roles and responsibilities; and
set out escalation and notification processes; and
processes to contain and assess the incident.
All Trust Framework providers must establish an incident register and provide instructions for personnel to record privacy incidents.
All Trust Framework providers must review their incident register on a regular basis and ensure applicable processes and policies are updated accordingly.
All Trust Framework providers must have a privacy statement.
If a Trust Framework provider is collecting information for the purpose of undertaking an accredited digital identity service, then the provider must not use the information for any other purpose unless they are provided explicit authorisation by the user.
Part 5: Security and risk management rules
Security governance
All Trust Framework providers must ensure key security controls are identified, monitored, configured, and hardened in line with the security control best practices.
All Trust Framework providers must develop and implement a security management plan which:
identifies key personnel, information, and assets in relation to accredited digital identity services provided, and their associated risks; and
assesses the likelihood and impact of risks occurring; and
assesses adequacy of existing safeguards; and
determines which measures are likely to reduce or eliminate risks; and
implements security measures to reduce risks to an acceptable level.
All Trust Framework providers must complete a security risk assessment for the accredited digital identity service provided to inform the security management plan.
The security risk assessment must, at a minimum, include assessments and mitigations for all the following risks as applicable to the accredited digital identity service being provided:
weak human resource security; and
insufficient incident response; and
insecure facilitation mechanism; and
credential loss due to device or facilitation mechanism failure; and
insecure API endpoints; and
service provider outage; and
compromise of trust framework provider infrastructure; and
security of hosting services; and
weak service provider access controls; and
credentials unable to be verified; and
unauthorised usage of valid credentials.
All Trust Framework providers must undertake an independent assessment to validate that security risks are managed appropriately.
All Trust Framework providers must have a designated individual who is responsible for identifying and managing security risks.
All Trust Framework providers must review their security management plan at the earlier of the following:
twelve months from the previous review; or
when there is a change in their structure, function, or activities.
The security management plan review must:
determine the adequacy of existing policies, procedures, and mitigations; and
be updated to respond to any changes regarding risks, threats, and operating environment; and
be updated to respond to any changes regarding risks, threats, and operating environment; and
include any steps taken and planned in response to any risk areas identified and communicated to Trust Framework providers by the TF Authority.
(8A) All Trust Framework providers must provide the results of the security management plan review to the TF Authority in the next annual report following the completion of the security management plan review.
All Trust Framework providers must develop and implement a business continuity plan which covers:
functions in relation to accredited digital identity service; and
recovery requirements for systems; and
identify and backup vital records; and
testing requirements and restoration procedures.
All Trust Framework providers must have documented instructions and procedures to assist personnel to identify, report and respond to security incidents.
All Trust Framework providers must have documented policies and procedures for investigating security incidents.
All Trust Framework providers must establish an incident register and provide instructions for personnel to register security incidents.
All Trust Framework providers must record at least the following information regarding security incidents:
time, date, and country of origin; and
description of the circumstances; and
whether the incident was deliberate or accidental; and
an assessment of the degree of compromise or harm; and
a summary of actions taken to resolve the incident.
All Trust Framework providers must report significant cyber security incidents related to accredited digital identity services:
to the TF Authority; and
to the National Cyber Security Centre; and
any other organisation as required by the TF Authority.
All Trust Framework providers must satisfy breach reporting requirements under the Privacy Act 2020.
Information security
All Trust Framework providers when completing a security risk assessment must assess the identified information and systems with regard to their value, importance, and sensitivity.
All Trust Framework providers must have processes in place to assess that their information security measures have been correctly implemented.
All Trust Framework providers must have processes to ensure their security measures are fit for purpose by:
monitoring systems, networks, and processes for vulnerabilities; and (b) 	keeping up to date with evolving threats.
If information is no longer required, Trust Framework providers must ensure information is archived, destroyed, or disposed of securely and appropriately.
All Trust Framework providers must have procedures to:
identify changes to normal behaviour; and
determine the extent and impact of anomalous behaviour on data confidentiality, integrity, or privacy breaches.
All Trust Framework providers must collect and keep sufficient information regarding security events to support audits, investigations, and incident management, including:
external breaches; and
insider threats; and
longer-term persistent threats.
All Trust Framework providers must separate, protect, and store event logs and analysis capabilities to ensure the availability, accuracy and integrity of the information captured and held.
All Trust Framework providers must protect digital information and systems using approved cryptographic products, algorithms and protocols that are set out in the New Zealand Information Security Manual.
All Trust Framework providers must securely manage cryptographic keys used in their accredited digital identity services following a documented key management plan.
The key management plan must cover:
key management lifecycle; and
system description; and
records maintenance and audits.
Physical security
All Trust Framework providers must minimise or eliminate, so far as is reasonably practicable, the risk of plant and structures being maintained, accessed, used, or removed without appropriate authority.
All Trust Framework providers must implement physical security measures in line with identified threats, vulnerabilities, and risk appetite.
All Trust Framework providers must have processes in place to assess that their physical security measures have been correctly implemented.
All Trust Framework providers must have processes to assess and respond to evolving threats or vulnerabilities and ensure physical security measures remain fit for purpose.
Personnel security
All Trust Framework providers must ensure the suitability of personnel who have access to information and systems that support operations relevant to their accredited digital identity service.
All Trust Framework providers must have processes to manage and assess the ongoing suitability of its personnel.
All Trust Framework providers must have processes to manage changes in roles or the departure of personnel, including:
removal of access rights to physical and electronic resources; and
return of assets.
All Trust Framework providers must set up role-based access management protocols.
All Trust Framework providers must ensure personnel receive communications regarding security policies, including:
responsibilities; and
issues and concerns.
All Trust Framework providers must ensure personnel receive appropriate and up-todate security training.
Part 6: Information and data management rules
Information and data governance
All Trust Framework providers must develop and implement an information and data management plan that covers requirements for handling information and data used in the accredited digital identity service they provide.
The information and data management plan must:
define risks around the information and data that is stored and shared; and
detail practices for managing information and data, including managing information and data ethically; and
detail practices for recordkeeping, including details of records kept, methods of retention and period of retention; and
include retention and disposal schedules for personal and organisational information intended to be shared within the Trust Framework provider’s accredited Trust Framework services.
All Trust Framework providers must have a designated individual responsible for maintaining the information and data management plan and overseeing its implementation and operation.
All Trust Framework providers must review their information and data management plan at the earlier of the following:
two years from the previous review; or
when there is a change to the accredited digital identity service.
Managing information ethically
The practices for managing information ethically in the information and data management plan must include:
considerations of Māori cultural perspectives; and
specific kaitiakitanga requirements when handling Māori information.
All Trust Framework providers must inform users if personal or organisational information and related data is stored and/or processed outside of New Zealand.
Recordkeeping
The practices for recordkeeping outlined in the information and data management plan must include detailed record keeping practices in place to support investigations or analysis by the TF Authority of compliance of their accredited digital identity service.
Information about an accredited digital identity service transaction must be retained for the retention period set by
section 21 of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations
unless there is a legislative requirement to retain them for a different period.
All Trust Framework providers must inform the Trust Framework Authority, as soon as practicable, if a retention period different to the one set by
section 21 the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations 2024
applies to their service.
History of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Rules 2024
This consolidation incorporates:
Rule
Commencement date
Description
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Rules 2024
8 November 2024
Original rules
Digital Identity Services Trust  Framework Amendment  Rules 2025-1
24 July 2025
Updated some standards and policies; added and clarified definitions in the Interpretation section and small edits to wording and grammar.
Source Document