 
 
 
 
 
 

            
      
  
This document was prepared by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
Directorate for Public Governance (GOV), to inform the discussions in the G20 Digital Economy Task Force 
at the request of the G20 Italian Presidency in 2021. The opinions expressed and arguments employed 
herein do not necessarily reflect the official views of the OECD, its Member countries or G20 members. 
This document and any data herein are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any territory, 
to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area. 
 
Specific territorial disclaimer applicable to the OECD 
 
Note by Turkey 
The information in this document with reference to “Cyprus” relates to the southern part of the 
Island. There is no single authority representing both Turkish and Greek Cypriot people on the 
Island. Turkey recognises the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC). Until a lasting and 
equitable solution is found within the context of the United Nations, Turkey shall preserve its 
position concerning the “Cyprus issue”. 
 
Note by all the European Union Member States of the OECD and the European Union 
The Republic of Cyprus is recognised by all members of the United Nations with the exception 
of Turkey. The information in this document relates to the area under the effective control of the 
Government of the Republic of Cyprus. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© OECD 2021 
The use of this work, whether in digital or print, is governed by the Terms and Conditions to be found at 
http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions

            
 © OECD 2021 
  
Table of contents 
Acknowledgements 
1 
Executive Summary 
2 
1 Policy and normative context for Digital Identity 
4 
Digital identity – easily usable, reliable, secure, trusted, and portable digital identity solutions fit 
for the 21st century 
4 
Ensuring citizen consent, personal data protection, and security 
5 
Empowering citizens to take control over their digital identity 
6 
Equipping citizens with a portable digital identity they can use anywhere and for anything 
7 
Restoring identity to the marginalised and forgotten 
9 
2 The role of digital identity in responding to COVID-19 
12 
Examples of uses of digital identity during the COVID-19 pandemic 
12 
Enabling proactive continuity of existing public and private sector services 
12 
Welfare payments and financial aid 
13 
Contact tracing and lockdowns 
13 
Vaccination distribution and certificates 
13 
Lessons learned from the use of digital identity during the COVID-19 pandemic 
14 
Promoting and maintaining trust in digital identity systems 
14 
The role of digital identity in emergencies and crises 
14 
3 Enabling the conditions for successful digital identity 
15 
Collection of digital identity practices across the G20 membership 
15 
Governance and funding of digital identity solutions 
16 
Strategic leadership and delivery oversight 
16 
Securing funding for digital identity and its associated ecosystem 
17 
Establishing the operational model for digital identity 
17 
Setting standards and levels of assurance for digital identity 
18 
User experience 
20 
Means of authentication 
21 
Data privacy, visibility and user consent 
23 
Legislation to protect personal identifiable data and oversight authority 
23 
Adoption 
26 
Mandating use 
26 
Measuring adoption 
27 
Portability 
29 
Cross-platform portability 
30 
Cross-sectoral portability 
30 

            
 © OECD 2021 
  
Cross-border portability 
30 
Priorities for future developments 
32 
Legislation and policy 
32 
Plans for cross-border portability 
33 
Decentralised identity 
33 
4 Concluding observations 
34 
Annex: Collection of digital identity practices 
36 
Argentina 
36 
1. National context 
36 
2. Current national Digital Identity management system 
36 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity 
40 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
40 
Australia 
40 
1. National context 
40 
2. Current national Digital Identity management system 
41 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity 
43 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
44 
Brazil 
44 
1. National context 
44 
2. Current national Digital Identity management system 
45 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity 
47 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
48 
Democratic Republic of Congo 
49 
European Union 
49 
Germany 
49 
1. National context 
49 
2. Current national Digital Identity management system 
49 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity 
52 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
53 
Italy 
53 
1. National context 
53 
2. Current national Digital Identity management system 
54 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity 
56 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
58 
Indonesia 
58 
Mexico 
58 
Russia 
59 
1. National context 
59 
2. Current national Digital Identity management system 
59 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity 
62 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
62 
Saudi Arabia 
62 
1. National context 
62 
2. Current national Digital Identity management system 
62 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity 
64 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms in Saudi Arabia 
64 
Singapore 
65 
1. National context 
65 
2. Current national Digital Identity management system 
65 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity 
68 

            
 © OECD 2021 
  
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
68 
Spain 
69 
1. National context 
69 
2. Current national Digital Identity management system 
69 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity 
70 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
71 
Turkey 
71 
1. National context 
71 
2. Current national Digital Identity management system 
71 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity 
74 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
75 
United Kingdom 
75 
1. National context 
75 
2. Current national Digital Identity management system 
75 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity 
76 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
76 
United States of America 
77 
 
Tables 
Table 3.1. National digital identity solution covered in the data capture 
16 
Table 3.2. What the national digital identity can be used for 
21 
Table 3.3. Means for authentication 
23 
Table 3.4. Authority that monitors and oversees the impact of DI on individual privacy and freedoms 
24 
Table 3.5. Data visibility and consent 
25 
Table 3.6. Mandatory use of available DI solution(s) for service user authentication and verification by public 
sector organisations 
27 
Table 3.7. Current levels of portability of digital identity 
29 
Table 3.8. Implemented or plans for cross-border digital identity 
32 
 
Figures 
Figure 1.1. Migration flows to G20 countries, 2018 and 2019, thousands 
10 
Figure 3.1. Adoption of digital identity among the population, 2019 compared to 2021 
28 
Figure 3.2. Percentage increase in adoption among the population, 2019 compared to 2021 
29 
 
Boxes 
Box 3.1. Identity proofing on the GOV.BR identity platform, Brazil 
19 
 

1 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
Acknowledgements 
This report was produced under the G20 Italian Presidency. It was prepared by the OECD Directorate for 
Public Governance, under the leadership of Elsa Pilichowski. It was produced by the OECD Open and 
Innovative Government Division, under the supervision of Barbara-Chiara Ubaldi, Acting Head of Division 
and Head of the Digital Government and Data Unit. 
The report was written by Benjamin Welby and Cecilia Emilsson from the Digital Government and Data 
Unit. All sections benefitted from the strategic review of Barbara-Chiara Ubaldi and Charles Baubion, 
Advisor, Director’s Office, OECD Public Governance Directorate. Colleagues from the OECD Science, 
Technology and Innovation Directorate reviewed and provided comments. 
The paper relies on contributions detailing the digital identity experiences of Argentina, Australia, Brazil, 
the European Union, Germany, Indonesia, Italy, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Spain, Turkey, and the 
United Kingdom. Information was also provided by Democratic Republic of Congo and Mexico where digital 
identity solutions are currently under development while in the United States of America, identities are 
generated at the local government level and used to create state government level identity credentials 
rather than there being a single federal solution. Information was not available for Canada, China, France, 
India, Japan, Korea and South Africa. 
 
 
 

2 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
Under the 2021 Italian Presidency, the G20 recognised digital identity as a priority for achieving social and 
economic inclusion, forming part of its broader commitments to advancing digital government through the 
work of the G20 Digital Economy Task Force (DETF). 
As enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, all individuals have the right to be recognised 
as a person before the law. There is still much to do to address the need for and basic right of individuals 
to be able to prove who they are: in 2018, one billion people in the world lacked access to proof of a legal 
identity, and a further three billion people who held proof of their legal identities were unable to reliably use 
them in the digital world. 
Broadening access to digital identity systems for individuals can help leapfrog paper-based, resource-
intensive and less secure identity systems to propel economic development by opening new markets and 
including the marginalised into society and the formal economy. Achieving portable and re-usable identity, 
that works across borders and for both public and private services, can help meet the 21st century needs 
of citizens and the global digital market. 
Digital identity was a vital tool for responding to the COVID-19 pandemic, allowing for the provision of fast, 
secure, and remote access to public and private sector services. Dramatic increases in adoption followed 
from its use in aiding epidemiological surveillance, and ensuring the continuity of our societies 
and economies. As 
the 
post-COVID 
recovery 
gains 
pace, 
digital 
identity 
is proving 
to 
be critical for enabling the verification of test and vaccination proofs. The benefits witnessed have 
underscored the importance of leveraging digital identity in future emergencies and crises, and to uphold 
public trust in digital identity systems by maintaining high security controls and privacy safeguards.  
The G20 is well placed to lead a global transition to digital identity. Learning from existing, sometimes 
fragmented, digital identity solutions in the world and building on its accelerated adoption during the 
pandemic, the G20 can explore how to ensure that digital identity delivers on its promise of serving a better, 
more inclusive and prosperous world. 
In line with the ambition of the Italian G20 Presidency, this report acts as a descriptive guide to the 
experience of digital identity for individuals and a potential departure for future work to realise the 
opportunities offered by portable and re-usable digital identity in the 21st century. Built on a collection of 
digital identity practices shared by the membership of the G20 DETF, it provides the policy and normative 
context for digital identity and what this implies, both in terms of challenges and opportunities. 
It surfaces uses of digital identity during the COVID-19 crisis and considers the necessary enabling 
conditions for successful adoption of portable and re-usable digital identity.   
This report provides four main concluding observations for the G20 membership to support the general 
development of inclusive, equitable and trusted digital identity solutions that allow citizens to verify and 
authenticate their identity as easily as possible in any given context:  
• 
Digital identity can add the greatest value when it is integrated into the day-to-day life of 
citizens allowing access to services provided by multiple sectors and countries.   
• 
It is valuable to continuously reflect on the user experience (including end-users and service 
providers) in the development and delivery of digital identity solutions.   
Executive summary  

3 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
• 
Digital identity can provide citizens with ownership and visibility of how their data is being 
used and shared in order to encourage them to take greater control over their digital identity and 
to uphold trust in new and existing digital identity systems.   
• 
The success of digital identity solutions requires a comprehensive governance grounded 
on effective legal frameworks, leadership, cross-sector collaboration and resources.  

4 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
Digital identity – easily usable, reliable, secure, trusted, and portable digital 
identity solutions fit for the 21st century  
In 2020-2021, the social and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the potential value 
and application of digital identity for individuals1. The pandemic accelerated the digital transformation of 
governments as public services operating in full digital mode meant rethinking how to verify the identity of 
users. To keep societies open and functional, countries turned to the verification of individual identity 
to trace contacts, prove vaccination or test status, and support continued international travel. These 
experiences surfaced the critical importance of maintaining trust in the way governments handle and use 
the most sensitive data of their citizens2. 
The verification of people’s identity has long been core to human and economic development. The sharing 
of attributes and qualities that make up one person in legal terms is the basis for taking an active role in 
society, including the ability to vote, interact with government, and receive health care, education and 
transfer funds. The identification of individuals is also a fundamental right. As enshrined in the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, all individuals 
have the right to be recognised as a person before the law.  
Despite recognising the importance of legal identification, the global community still faces big challenges 
in securing its implementation. The World Bank’s Identification for Development (ID4D) Global Dataset 
reports that worldwide, one billion people lack a proof of identity3, while a further 3 billion people face 
considerable limits on the ability to use their proofs of identity in a digital context. The inability for 
individuals to prove that they exist, and that they are who they are, poses a severe threat to global social 
and economic inclusion. In 2015, the international community recognised the need to address the issue 
by adopting Goal 16:9 of the Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 to “provide legal identity for all 
including free birth registrations”. The World Bank Identity for Development 2020 Annual Report4 
emphasised the urgency of the global identity gap, highlighting that it “disproportionately affects vulnerable 
populations, such as the poor, people living in rural and remote areas, marginalized women and children, 
stateless persons, migrants, and persons with disabilities.” The overrepresentation of vulnerable groups in 
                                                
1 Following the request of the G20 membership this report focuses on the experience of digital identity solutions for 
individuals. Nevertheless, the annex detailing the returns from countries includes examples where consideration has 
been given to the challenge of identity for organisations and legal entities. 
2https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy-responses/tracking-and-tracing-covid-protecting-privacy-and-data-while-
using-apps-and-biometrics-8f394636/  
3 https://id4d.worldbank.org/global-dataset/visualization 
4http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/625371611951876490/pdf/Identification-for-Development-ID4D-2020-
Annual-Report.pdf 
1 Policy and normative context for 
Digital Identity 

5 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
the global identity gap threatens to widen already existing inequalities as societies and economies become 
more dependent on digital identity verification to effectively function and operate.  
There are however, two fundamental promises offered by achieving an equitable and inclusive model for 
digital identity: 
• 
The first is in addressing the global identity gap by enabling developing countries to leapfrog 
analogue, resource-consuming identification systems. The Global System for Mobile 
Communications Association (GSMA)5, which represents the interests of mobile operators 
worldwide, has shown a rapid growth of access to mobile broadband worldwide, including across 
developing countries. Mobile networks are a key enabler of digital identification with mobile network 
providers (MNOs) and the mobile industry central for helping governments achieve digital identity 
coverage.  
• 
The second, in line with the ambitious demands of the G20 Digital Government Principles6 and the 
OECD Recommendation of the Council on Digital Government Strategies7, is the transformative 
potential of easy to use and trusted digital identity solutions to facilitate the way in which services 
are designed, delivered, consumed and experienced. The challenge facing governments and 
private sector organisations is not merely to transfer analogue identity systems online but to 
redesign and rethink interactions between citizens and the state, between non-citizens and 
authorities, and between consumers and private service providers. In this way, digital identity can 
be the vehicle for meeting citizen needs through the design and delivery of proactive services as 
discussed in the G20 Compendium on the Use of Digital Tools for Public Service Continuity and 
section 2 of this report. 
Ensuring citizen consent, personal data protection, and security  
The combination of new technologies and the handling of sensitive aspects of an individual’s very being 
mean that identity systems are highly scrutinised by the public and civil society and require governments 
to ensure they mitigate potential risks.  The G20 membership, through the Declaration of G20 Digital 
Ministers, supports the development of digital identity solutions that are based on the users’ freely given, 
specific, and informed consent, and protect citizens’ privacy and personal data within the domestically 
applicable legal frameworks. It further recognizes that receiving government services by means of digital 
identity should not completely replace other means of accessing services, in order for citizens to 
meaningfully consent to the use of digital identity. To encourage use and maintain trust in digital identity 
systems, the practical steps to unlock the potential of digital identity should be built on the existing efforts 
of international organisations and standard-setting bodies to guide the conversation around digital identity 
                                                
5 Commercially Sustainable Roles for Mobile Operators in Digital ID Ecosystems 
https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Commercially-Sustainable-Roles-for-
Mobile-Operators-in-Digital-ID-Ecosystems.pdf 
6 G20 Digital Government Principles http://www.g20.utoronto.ca/2018/2018-08-24-digital.html#annex1 
7 OECD Recommendation on Digital Government Strategies 
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0406 

6 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
in terms of authentication8, personal data protection9 and security risks10. It would also benefit from building 
on previous work of the G20, such as the G20 Digital Identity Onboarding11 developed under the 2018 
Argentine Presidency, which provided a comprehensive documentation of the challenges and opportunities 
related to digital identity for financial services. 
Empowering citizens to take control over their digital identity   
Solving the problem of identity verification on the internet has taken many forms since it became apparent 
that the same needs for verifying the identity of individuals in physical space also existed online. Digital 
identity is now seen as one of the most important instruments for closing the identity gap in countries where 
legal identity is not widely accessible. Over time, approaches towards digital identity have shifted focus 
away from primarily meeting the needs of organisations for authentication, towards empowering citizens 
with greater control and visibility over their digital footprints with a range of country experiences compared 
and contrasted by the OECD in 201812.  
The early approach to online identification was every service and organisation independently solving the 
problem, leading to a multiplicity of user accounts with an associated multiplicity of usernames and 
passwords and differing levels of authentication. These models helped make the Internet and digital space 
what it is today but reflected an organisation-centric view of identity that resulted in little or no control for 
citizens over their identity, and fragmented the ownership and responsibility for their sensitive information 
and data across multiple organisations.  
The first national approaches to digital identity tried to address the issue by creating singular, centralised, 
forms of identity, rooted in existing analogue proofs. These e-ID efforts saw countries take existing identity 
infrastructure that included identity cards and population registers and add an additional layer of 
functionality to physical tokens, through a combination of card-reading hardware and digital certificates. In 
many countries, this solution was developed in partnership with the private sector, including the financial 
sector, to allow for the portability and reuse of an identity, and by extension their credentials and data, to 
access services in both the public and private sectors.   
However, the e-ID approach had its own limitations. This was particularly acute for those societies and 
governments where identity was not based on identity cards or population registers. However, these 
limitations were also felt in constraining ambitions for transforming the user experience of government and 
the private sector to be seamless and frictionless. In attempting to address the disadvantages of 
                                                
8OECD Recommendation on Electronic Authentication https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-
LEGAL-03532002 
9 OECD Privacy Guidelines https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0188 and OECD Good 
Practice Principles of Data Ethics in the Public Sector https://www.oecd.org/gov/digital-government/good-practice-
principles-for-data-ethics-in-the-public-sector.htm 
10OECD 
Recommendation 
on 
Digital 
Security 
Risk 
Management 
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0415 
11G20 Digital Identity Onboarding 
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/362991536649062411/pdf/129861WP-10-9-2018-17-26-21-
GDigitalIdentityOnboardingReportlowres.pdf 
 
12 Digital Government in Chile – Digital Identity (OECD, 2019), https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9ecba35e-en compared the 
experience of 13 countries (Austria, Canada, Denmark, Estonia, India, Italy, Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, 
Spain, United Kingdom and Uruguay) to establish an analytical framework for understanding how to develop and 
implement a digital identity (DI) approach that supports the transformation of government 

7 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
organisation specific, centralised approaches, a federated model for digital identity was developed as an 
alternative.   
In a federated identity model, a digital identity is not provided by service-specific providers or a single, 
central solution but through defined trust frameworks and identity standards. These frameworks and 
standards encourage multiple actors to operate as identity providers (IdPs). Users verify their identity with 
their choice of IdP and refer to them when they need to access a service requiring identify verification. For 
those societies without an analogue identity infrastructure of population registers or identity cards, this has 
become the preferred route to develop digital identity solutions. Federated approaches help to avoid 
individual organisations developing authentication infrastructure independently, and thus reduces the 
fragmentation of ownership and responsibility for citizen credentials. Nevertheless, despite its benefits, the 
federated approach does leave IdPs with a lot of responsibility and control over individuals’ identity and 
their sensitive data13. 
There are increasing calls for digital identity solutions to address the lack of control citizens have over their 
online identity and credentials. In the 2030 Digital Compass14, the EU Commission presented their vision 
for 2030 with a “wide deployment of a trusted, user-controlled identity, allowing each citizen to control their 
own online interactions and presence”. This idea is also at the heart of the EU Commission’s proposed 
regulation in June 2021 to establish the European Digital Identity Framework15. Its aim is to realise the 
vision of a secure and trusted EU Digital Identity available to every EU citizen, resident, and business who 
wants to identify themselves or provide confirmation of certain personal information online and offline, 
across public and private services within the EU. All citizens and residents in the Union will be able to use 
a personal digital wallet, which is already a feature for several countries including Spain, where the 
associated consent models give individuals greater control and visibility over their data access and use.  
Other, emergent ideas favour a more minimal approach to the exchange of personal information and rely 
instead on the possibilities and potential of decentralising identity to the individual through Self-Sovereign 
Identity (SSI) and verifiable credentials. These models give citizens ultimate control and ownership over 
their online presence and each interaction with their digital identity, from what of their attributes and data 
are being shared, with whom and for what purpose.  
Equipping citizens with a portable digital identity they can use anywhere and 
for anything  
Digital identity has the potential to be an important driver of citizen well-being16. However, for this potential 
to be realised it is critical to conceive of digital identity as a service that can equip citizens to address the 
needs they have in any context and at any time and not as a top-down mechanism for identity verification. 
Therefore, it is a primary goal for digital identity efforts to achieve as broad and varied portability as 
possible.  
                                                
13 As an example, the provision of a version of federated identity with lower levels of assurance that offers simple and 
ubiquitous log-in and sign-up by large online platforms such as Google and Facebook has become a familiar feature 
in many citizens’ lives, but with the platforms ultimately controlling the user data and associated credentials across the 
different services they provide access to. 
14 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/digital-compass  
15 Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 
as regards establishing a framework for a European Digital Identity (SEC(2021) 228 final). Available at: https://digital-
strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/trusted-and-secure-european-e-id-regulation  
16 The impact of Digital Government on citizen well-being, OECD Working Papers on Public Governance, (Welby, 
2019) https://doi.org/10.1787/24bac82f-en 

8 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
Portability of digital identity can reflect several important priorities, all of which require their own strategic 
and practical efforts to fully deliver on their benefits. 
Firstly, that a digital identity can be used away from a desk at home or the office. In other words, that 
access is not restricted only through the presence of suitable hardware such as card readers or digital 
certificates but can be portable in the sense that someone is able to take advantage of their identity 
whenever, and wherever they are through an approach to digital identity supported through mobile devices. 
This necessitates governments to consider the broader implications of policies focusing on connectivity or 
mobile network coverage to support the development of successful digital identity. 
Secondly, that a digital identity can be used in any transactions or interactions that require a high level of 
assurance, regardless of whether the service is being provided by the public sector, or the private sector. 
Although the private sector may be involved in providing identity, it is essential to recognise the role of the 
private sector as a provider of services too. Although the public sector need for digital identity is vital for 
the design and delivery of services associated with taxation, welfare and health, individuals have similar 
needs to prove identity in dealings with suppliers ranging from telecommunications, to banking, to travel. 
The portability of identity between different domains is an important benefit that helps to encourage 
adoption and ensure the benefits of digital identity are as widespread as possible. In Europe, the newly 
proposed regulation for establishing an EU Digital Identity Framework has as one of its aims making it 
easier for users to access more services, irrespective of the type of provider across the single market and 
reflects the difficulties experienced by private sector service providers in connecting to the digital identity 
solutions previously developed by Member States. 
Thirdly, that a digital identity can be used across geographic boundaries. The ability for individuals to 
identify themselves outside the jurisdiction in which they reside opens up incredible possibilities for 
services to be offered across borders and for countries to tailor their response to the needs of users who 
are neither nationals nor residents, without needing to undertake separate efforts to prove their eligibility 
or otherwise.  
In a domestic context a cross-platform, sector-agnostic digital identity requires agreement on a standards-
based approach to unlock the potential value through technical interoperability. However, to extend the 
portability and reuse of digital identity across borders requires international cooperation and mutual 
recognition by one country of the solutions that are trusted and supported by another. In April 2021, the 
UN Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) published the Draft Provisions on the Use and 
Cross-Border Recognition of Identity Management and Trust Services17 with the aim to promote uniformity 
in the development and application of operational rules, policies and practices for identity management. 
The principles are applicable in the context of commercial activities and trade-related services. For cross-
border recognition, the draft principles says that “An Identity Management system operated or a trust 
service provided outside [the enacting jurisdiction] shall have the same legal effect in [the enacting 
jurisdiction] as an IdM system operated or a trust service provided in [the enacting jurisdiction] if it offers a 
substantially equivalent level of reliability.”  
In order to define “substantially equivalent level of reliability” the draft principles point towards recognised 
international standards and enacting jurisdictions to determinate equivalency. The eIDAS regulation of the 
European Union remains the best-known practical example of a cross-border recognised digital identity, 
and thus stands as an important international reference. Currently only mandatory for public services, the 
system is built as a federated model that provides mutual recognition of each Member State’s national 
eIDs. Since digital identity is a national competence of Member States, eIDAS addressed the issue of 
reliability, comparability and interoperability of national digital identities - similar to ensuring “substantially 
equivalent level of reliability” in the UNCITRAL draft principles - by introducing a detailed technical 
specification criteria for defining assurance levels, as set forth in implementing regulation (EU) 2015/1502. 
                                                
17 https://undocs.org/en/A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.167 

9 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
In June 2021, the EU Commission published a proposal for a regulation to amend the current eIDAS 
regulation in order to foster greater cross-sectoral and cross-border usability within the EU single market 
and to allow citizens to take greater control over their identity and data.  
UNCITRAL and EU activities considering the development and then reuse and availability of digital identity 
across borders are the main reference materials. However, it is important to recognise multilateral efforts 
taking place in other parts of the world to achieve cross-border mutual recognition of digital identity such 
as the work happening between Australia, New Zealand and Singapore as well as further nascent attempts 
to guide this conversation in regional terms whether in East Africa, Latin America or South-East Asia. 
These concerted efforts make the ambition for an ability to move with one's identity across borders an 
increasingly likely possibility. Nevertheless, this raises interesting questions about the character of future 
society and the reasons why countries and individuals would wish to pursue such an approach to digital 
identity. In order to achieve this vision of a portable digital identity that can be used anywhere, and for 
everything, the challenge is to secure interoperability, reliability and equivalency between different digital 
identity systems and solutions. Just as with federated and decentralised identity systems, portability calls 
for enhanced coordination, collaboration and trust between actors of the identity ecosystem with the 
international angle providing an even greater challenge to overcome that the G20 is well positioned to help 
facilitate.   
Restoring identity to the marginalised and forgotten  
The primary focus for conversations about digital identity is usually located in the experience 
of stable citizenship and residency in domestic settings, where the concerns are transforming government 
services or delivering value to the economy. However, for the one billion people around the world without 
access to legal identity documents, or the three billion people in the world who can’t use theirs effectively 
in a digital context, this may not speak to the experience of their lives. This may be because they are 
socially marginalised in a settled society, or facing the trauma and upheaval of being refugees in more 
fragile contexts. Nevertheless, the UNHCR Strategy on Digital Identity and Inclusion18 identifies that as 
digital technologies broaden the concept and understanding of identification processes, governments 
remain responsible for ensuring the digital inclusion of all citizens and individuals living on their territory. 
In the Declaration of G20 Digital Ministers, the G20 membership has declared to pursue further work to 
find technology solutions for digital identity that are suitable in internet-scarce settings including in 
humanitarian and emergency scenarios19. By doing so, digital identity solutions can be leveraged to secure 
the human right for all individuals to be recognised everywhere as a person before the law20, including 
those who lack access to legal identity documents, such as refugees, forcibly displaced persons, and 
                                                
18 
UNHCR 
Strategy 
on 
Digital 
Identity 
and 
Inclusion, 
https://www.unhcr.org/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/sites/48/2018/03/2018-02-Digital-Identity_02.pdf  
19 A country that is working on the development of a digital identity solution for refugees is Turkey. The Turkish Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs and UNDP are piloting a digital identity platform to speed up the process of issuing working permits 
documentation for refugees. More information is available at https://tykn.tech/turkey/.  
20 Article 6 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides that “Everyone has the right to recognition 
everywhere as a person before the law.” The provision of digital identity solutions is used in identification processes 
to verify the identity of individuals and provide access to services that require authentication. As such, a digital identity 
solution can be used to help ensure that individuals are recognised before the law by helping them prove their identity 
and authenticate themselves without having to access or provide physical legal documents. Having a digital identity 
does not equal having a legal identity.  

10 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
individuals living in countries with incomplete civil registration, but also individuals who are financially 
excluded from society.  
Given the large share of the global refugee population hosted by G20 members, the use of digital identity 
solutions by refugees and forcibly displaced persons in these countries might provide large benefits if 
carefully developed and implemented. As of mid-2020, UNHCR estimated that the global refugee 
population was 26.3 million with almost 29% hosted by G20 countries. According to the 2020 Annual 
International Migration and Forced Displacement Trends and Policies Report to the G2021, latest available 
data indicate a 10% increase in migration flows to G20 countries in 2019. When developing and delivering 
digital identity solutions for humanitarian contexts such as refugee crises, it would benefit from building on 
previous extensive work of the UNHCR such as the Global Compact on Refugees22 and consultations 
hosted at the Global Virtual Summit on Digital Identity for Refugees23 that contains a set of 
recommendations concerning digital identity and refugee populations. For the development and delivery 
of digital identity solutions to address issues of financial exclusion work may build on that of the World 
Bank in the report G20 Digital Identity Onboarding24.   
Figure 1.1. Migration flows to G20 countries, 2018 and 2019, thousands 
 
Note: Data is not available for South Africa and India. Sources, definitions and coverage of data used vary significantly across countries. This 
does not allow for aggregations and direct comparisons, but order of magnitude and trends can be described. Data are generally based on 
national sources, and most often include temporary workers and students. Inflows to Turkey are estimates based on Ministry of Interior and 
Ministry of Labour reports. 
                                                
21 https://www.oecd.org/migration/mig/FINAL-2020-OECD-ILO-UNHCR-IOM-G20-report.pdf  
22 https://www.unhcr.org/the-global-compact-on-refugees.html  
23https://www.unhcr.org/idecosystem/wp-content/uploads/sites/69/2019/12/Conclusions_and_Recommendations.pdf   
24http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/362991536649062411/pdf/129861WP-10-9-2018-17-26-21-
GDigitalIdentityOnboardingReportlowres.pdf  

11 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
Source: Graph based on Table.1 of the 2020 Annual International Migration and Forced Displacement Trends and Policies Report to the G20, 
available at: https://www.oecd.org/migration/mig/FINAL-2020-OECD-ILO-UNHCR-IOM-G20-report.pdf. Original source: OECD 2020a National 
sources; OECD International Migration Database, OAS/OECD (2017) International migration in the Americas - SICREMI, ADBI/ILO/OECD 
(2020) Building Partnerships for Effectively Managing Labour Migration.   
Digital identity is increasingly an essential infrastructure to respond to the needs of the twenty-first century. 
For governments seeking to reap the full potential of digital technologies in transforming how their national 
identity systems work and how they deliver to citizens and marginalised communities, they must ensure 
that equity and inclusiveness are guiding their efforts. Equally important is that whatever technology, 
partnership or model is deployed, that it empowers citizens to take control over the sharing and reuse of 
their data and credentials. This provides the foundation for more advanced efforts to equip individuals with 
a genuinely portable digital identity, built on the ease and simplicity that they might use it in any context, 
via any platform, for any service and in any country.   
This report uses country examples to explore how G20 member countries have embarked on the journey 
towards digital identity for individuals, how it assisted them in facing the COVID-19 pandemic, and what 
conclusions can be made for the international community from these observations. Data and examples 
presented in this report were collected through the G20 Digital Identity Survey, administered in May and 
June 2021. This surfaced the digital identity experiences of Argentina, Australia, Brazil, the European 
Union, Germany, Indonesia, Italy, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Spain, Turkey, and the United 
Kingdom. Information was also provided by Democratic Republic of Congo and Mexico where digital 
identity solutions are currently under development while in the United States of America, identities are 
generated at the local government level and used to create state government level identity credentials 
rather than there being a single federal solution. Information was not available for Canada, China, France, 
India, Japan, Korea and South Africa. This provided information is summarised in the Annex.  
As this report is a descriptive guide to the experience of digital identity for individuals it can be a potential 
departure for future work by the G20 to address the challenges and realise the opportunities offered by 
portable and reusable digital identity in the twenty-first century. Future work could explore agreement, 
alignment and practicalities between G20 countries on the need for digital identity that can operate across 
borders, across public and private services, and in any modality.  

12 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
The COVID-19 pandemic amplified the need for public and private service providers to verify the identity 
of natural persons and businesses in the digital space while maintaining high security and privacy 
protection. The pandemic saw a fundamental change in how economic and governmental actors operate, 
not because of dedicated strategies or policies, but because there was no other choice. Yet while the 
transformation from physical to digital occurred at an incredible speed at all levels of society, this 
disruptiveness also presented risks of leaving people dissatisfied, mistreated or behind. The G20 members 
have shared concrete examples and experiences from how digital identity enabled the delivery of valuable 
services during the pandemic.  
Examples of uses of digital identity during the COVID-19 pandemic 
Many G20 countries saw significant growth in the adoption of digital identity since the start of the pandemic, 
with an average four-fold increase between 2019 and 202125. While this might not be attributed solely to 
the pandemic, there is a correlation between a surge in user adoption and the use of digital identity to 
access pandemic-related services. In addition to these new services, public health measures meant that 
existing services that relied on in-person authentication could no longer be provided in the physical space, 
forcing the authentication process to go digital as well. 
Enabling proactive continuity of existing public and private sector services 
Brazil saw a significant increase in adoption of digital identity during the pandemic as it was a requirement 
for accessing the services provided through GOV.BR, the government’s single website. The number of 
available services more than doubled during the pandemic to over 3 000 and saw citizens preferring the 
digital approach instead of unnecessary social contact during the pandemic. A similar reliance on digital 
identity was reported in Italy where the IO app, launched in 2020 as a means of accessing local and federal 
public services, requires the use of either SPID or the electronic identity card CIE and consequently helped 
support a 269% increase in digital identity adoption among the population between 2019 and 2021. 
In other countries citizens benefitted from digital identity to consume private sector services such as in 
Germany, where individuals could use the eID to prove their identity for activating SIM or eSIM cards 
remotely without the need for confirming their identity through video calls. In Saudi Arabia, almost all 
sectors, including health services, commercial, retail, ICT, and the judiciary benefited from digital identity 
to meet needs during the pandemic.  
                                                
25 Average increase in digital identity adoption among population in Germany, Italy, Saudi Arabia, Australia, Turkey, 
the United Kingdom and Brazil between April 2019 and April 2021. See chapter 3 and Annex for more details per 
country.  
2 The role of digital identity in 
responding to COVID-19 

13 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
Welfare payments and financial aid 
Given the negative economic impact of the pandemic on workers, families and businesses, financial aid 
has been one of the primary use cases for digital identity solutions. Digital identity was an essential tool 
for facilitating financial aid for businesses in both Australia and Germany but its most common use was for 
supporting individuals. In India, the government program for transferring cash subsidies and benefits 
“Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT)” relies largely on Aadhaar, the country’s biometric digital identity system for 
validating and transferring benefits to beneficiary accounts. In 2020, DBT dispersed benefits for over 400 
schemes under 56 ministries, and in October 2020, a total of 47 million beneficiaries received DBT relief 
up to 140 billion INR26. In Argentina, the long-standing commitment to digital identity meant that millions of 
citizens were able to receive financial support from the state, even during a period of restricted movement. 
In Italy, the use of the Public Digital Identity System (SPID) for accessing welfare measures as part of 
COVID-19 recovery packages significantly promoted its uptake.  
Contact tracing and lockdowns 
Another use of digital identity during the pandemic was to confirm the COVID-19 risk status of individuals 
in order to uphold public health measures and prevent the spread of the virus, particularly in the use of 
apps. In Turkey, citizens used their digital identity to log in to the e-Government Gateway and generate a 
personal code to access the government application “Hayat Eve Sığar – Life Fits Into Home”. This code 
enabled them to safely transfer data about their COVID-19 risk status in order to access services such as 
public transport and common public spaces.  
In Singapore, the national digital identity programme supported the contact tracing processes through the 
app “SafeEntry”, which enables authorised contact tracers to obtain identity information of visitors to a 
physical location. The identity information processed through the app was used as a credible reference to 
uncover locations visited by confirmed cases, identify possible clusters and target locations for deep 
cleaning. In order to use SafeEntry, users give their consent to the transfer of personal information upon 
scanning a SafeEntry QR code to check in whenever they visit a location. Italy also relied on its digital 
identity system to facilitate contact tracing efforts via the app “Immuni”. 
Vaccination distribution and certificates 
Distributing vaccines and issuing certificates proving vaccination status have been central to countries’ 
recovery strategies. As governments sought ways to return to normal and facilitate the opening up of 
borders and services, digital identity again came to play an important part. 
In Australia, citizens can use their digital identity to log in to myGov, which provides access to their COVID-
19 Vaccination Certificates. Australia’s strong authentication and verification methods built into the digital 
identity system help guard against fraud and ensure the person applying for the certificate is who they say 
they are. These approaches could form the basis for enabling a strong, internationally recognised and 
interoperable COVID-19 Vaccination Certificate to support international travel through integration of a 
person’s Digital Identity and digital wallet. In the EU, the EU Digital COVID-19 Certificate was delivered in 
July 2021. The vaccination certificate allows Member States to more easily confirm the vaccination status 
of visiting EU citizens. While the certificate does not affect the right of EU citizens to travel freely within the 
EU borders, it will be able to facilitate the process of EU citizens to enter into a country given the rules and 
restrictions that are applicable. In some places, this might imply that the individuals holding the certificate 
do not have to confine themselves upon arrival.  
                                                
26 National Informatics Centre blogs, “Direct Debit Transfer – A blessing during the pandemic”, 
https://www.nic.in/blogs/direct-benefit-transfer-a-blessing-during-the-time-of-pandemic/  

14 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
Lessons learned from the use of digital identity during the COVID-19 pandemic 
Given the sensitive types of data collected in order to verify and authenticate individuals’ identity for use in 
pandemic-related services and measures, the upholding of data privacy, data security and considerations 
for the ethical use of data has been critical in order to reduce the risks of potential harms and data misuse. 
Promoting and maintaining trust in digital identity systems 
In Australia, the government’s digital identity system maintained strong security controls and privacy 
safeguards to protect user privacy throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. According to the government, 
there have been no instances identified where the system has been unable to protect user privacy. 
Likewise, in Turkey the government reports that user privacy has been well protected during the COVID-
19 pandemic. Furthermore, Argentina reflected that with an increased reliance on digital tools and remote 
authentication it is essential to minimise fraud and exposure of personal data and that this underlined the 
value to the country of centrally developing the Central Electronic Authentication Platform (AUTENTICAR) 
platform. 
Other countries implemented new, temporary laws to facilitate the use of sensitive personal information for 
public health measures during the pandemic, which may have both a positive and negative impact on the 
trust associated with digital identity systems. In Singapore, the rules for processing personal data for 
contact tracing are specified in the Singaporean COVID (Temporary Measures) Act. The act allows public 
sector organisations and contact tracers to use personal data recorded in digital contact tracing systems 
only for the purpose of carrying out contact tracing, except where such data is needed by law enforcement 
for criminal investigations related to seven categories of serious offences, which cannot be modified 
without parliamentary approval.  
The role of digital identity in emergencies and crises 
The COVID-19 pandemic will not be the only crisis where it is important for individuals to prove their identity 
and access services in a fast and secure way without the need for providing physical documents. The 
Australian Government highlighted how digital identity can provide essential support in the case of natural 
disasters, as demonstrated during the 2019-2020 Australian bushfires. Digital identities can offset the 
challenge of finding identity documents such as birth certificates or passports which may have been 
destroyed, allowing for faster access to government services and relief payments. These benefits apply to 
any disaster or complex emergencies where people have lost access to physical legal identity documents, 
or cannot have easy physical access to service providers, which includes the plight of refugees as 
discussed in Section 1.  

15 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
Collection of digital identity practices across the G20 membership 
Across the G20, there are varied efforts to achieve the successful implementation of digital identity. These 
differing experiences build on country specific legacy practices and the existing building blocks that go with 
them. Approaches to digital identity are not universal and therefore it is unwise to attempt to establish a 
narrative that signals any particular norm for other countries to follow or, indeed, how to define ‘success’ 
in the context of digital identity. 
Nevertheless, as the experience of digital identity during the COVID-19 pandemic has shown, digital 
identity is an enabler for societies to thrive in the digital age. Its value is not just limited to moving quickly 
in a crisis but is directly connected to the extent to which countries can take advantage of the potential for 
digital transformation. As such, countries can learn from one another about how they approach particular 
challenges in the implementation and development of digital identity solutions. Based on the responses 
from the G20 membership to a survey27, this paper draws out their experience in five areas: 
• 
Governance and funding of digital identity solutions 
• 
The user experience of digital identity solutions 
• 
The role of digital identity solutions in protecting data, handling consent and empowering citizens 
• 
Understanding the adoption of digital identity solutions 
• 
The portability of digital identity solutions across technical platforms, service providing sectors and 
between different geographic jurisdictions 
The successful implementation of digital identity relies on a holistic and coordinated approach. This data 
capture exercise is intended to document the experience of digital identity across the G20 membership 
and provide the material to discuss different approaches and lessons learnt rather than to make any 
recommendations about particular practices. Table 3.1 provides a summary of the digital identity solutions 
captured through the data collection exercise. 
 
                                                
27 Responses to the survey were received from Argentina, Australia, Brazil, the European Union, Germany, Indonesia, 
Italy, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Turkey and the United Kingdom.  The United States provided information through 
a separate statement. G20 guest countries the Democratic Republic of Congo, Singapore and Spain also responded 
to the survey.  
3 Enabling the conditions for 
successful digital identity   

16 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
Table 3.1. National digital identity solution covered in the data capture 
  
National digital identity  
Argentina 
SID (Sistema de Identidad Digital) biometric identity platform 
Australia 
myGOV identity platform 
Brazil 
GOV.BR identity platform 
Germany 
German Citizen identity card 
Electronic residence permit for non-citizens of EU/EEA area 
eID card for EU citizens 
Italy 
Public Sector Digital Identity System (SPID) 
Electronic Identity Card (CIE) 
National Services Card (CNS) 
Indonesia 
Single Identity Number 
Russia 
Unified Identification and Authentication System (USIA) 
Saudi Arabia 
Digital ID via Tawakkalna and Absher apps 
Singapore 
Singpass and Corppass 
Spain 
Electronic National Identity Document (DNIe) 
Turkey 
e-Government Gateway identity platform 
United Kingdom 
GOV.UK Verify 
Note: Information was also provided by Democratic Republic of Congo and Mexico where digital identity solutions are currently under 
development while in the United States of America, identities are generated at the local government level and used to create state government 
level identity credentials rather than there being a single federal solution. Information is not available for Canada, China, France, India, Japan, 
Korea and South Africa.  
Source: OECD (2021), “G20 Digital Identity Survey”, desk research.  
Governance and funding of digital identity solutions 
Realising the potential of digital for government relies on effective governance models28. In the context of 
digital identity, the foundational pillars to support its development, delivery and management include 
providing strategic leadership and overseeing delivery, securing funding, the design of the model for digital 
identity and ensuring compliance with identity standards.   
Strategic leadership and delivery oversight 
The way a country approaches digital identity has far reaching consequences and implications for 
fundamental elements of how a society functions. It is therefore imperative that digital identity solutions are 
trusted by service providers as well as being understood and embraced by the public themselves. 
Achieving the successful technical implementation of digital identity may involve rationalising existing 
identity infrastructure (such as identity cards) and previous solutions developed on an organisational or 
sectoral basis. As such, providing visionary and strategic leadership to oversee delivery is critical for 
successful digital identity. 
The design and delivery of digital government activity benefits from proximity and coordination between 
strategic, delivery and operational actors. Indeed, the majority of surveyed countries place the strategic 
responsibility for digital identity and its delivery within organisations focused on the digital transformation 
of government. These organisations include the Digital Transformation Agency in Australia, Department of 
Digital Transformation in collaboration with Agenzia per l'Italia Digitale in Italy, the Saudi Data and Artificial 
Intelligence Authority in Saudi Arabia and the Government Digital Service in the United Kingdom.  
In Brazil, responsibility for delivery of digital identity rests with the Special Secretariat for Modernization of 
the State with strategic leadership coming from the Ministry of Economy while in Spain oversight is handled 
jointly by the Ministry of Economy and Ministry of the Interior. In Argentina, several actors are involved. 
                                                
28 OECD (2014), Recommendation of the Council on Digital Government Strategies 

17 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
The Secretariat of Public Innovation (SIP) from the Chief of Cabinet of Minister’s Office establishes the 
strategic direction and regulatory proposals, the Undersecretariat of Administrative Innovation (located 
within SIP) implements technical digital identity solutions, and the Ministry of Interior takes operational 
responsibility for identifying individuals through the National Registry of People (Registro Nacional de las 
Personas, RENAPER).  
Some countries have entrusted the delivery of digital identity to state-owned enterprises. In Turkey, the 
publicly funded satellite operator Türksat is responsible for managing digital identity under the umbrella of 
the e-Government Gateway. In Germany, strategic leadership for digital identity belongs to the Ministry of 
the Interior but a state-owned enterprise, the Bundesdruckerei Group, produces documents and devices 
for secure identification and offers corresponding services, including the three digital identification cards. 
Contemporary approaches to digital identity are heavily shaped by the historic context in a given country 
and these strategic organisations need sufficient mandate to be able to address potential challenges. In 
some settings, such as Australia, the approach is to develop clear policy positions, set out best practices 
and design trust frameworks to take advantage of the opportunities for interoperable digital identity. 
Elsewhere, a stronger legal basis is preferred with Mexico developing new legislation to target the 
landscape of existing legacy solutions and Brazil using Law nº 13.444/2017 to give digital identity the status 
of a legal identity for Brazilians to access both public and private sector services. 
Securing funding for digital identity and its associated ecosystem 
Funding for digital identity has to consider several factors, including initial start-up costs, return on 
investment and benefits realisation, technical solution development, technical support for relying parties, 
and whether or not to subsidise access for citizens. In countries where the private sector is a delivery 
partner, additional costs may be involved to support their role, as well as the creation of a market for digital 
identity provision.  
A majority of countries, including Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Spain and Singapore reported that the 
provision of digital identity was fully funded by the government. In Australia, this may change in the future 
as a charging framework is being considered as a means of addressing the long-term sustainability of the 
system. In Brazil, the budget and technical development for digital identity are centralized within the 
Secretariat of Digital Government of the Ministry of Economy, which offers a technical team to support 
public agencies in implementing the digital identity solutions. 
In some countries, there is a mixed approach of public funding and funding from external sources, including 
from financial institutions and identity providers (IdPs) selling their digital identity solutions to service 
providers. In Turkey, IdPs are financed by the government and by financial institutions. In Saudi Arabia, 
the government funds IdPs to provide services to the public sector free of charge, whereas private IdPs 
brokers are self-funded by generating revenues.  
Funding models can also be informed by the design of the digital identity solution. For example, in Italy, 
SPID and its IdPs are self-funding by selling SPID to relying parties whereas the alternative CIE sees users 
pay approximately EUR 24 to get their identity card with a fraction of this fee used to sustain services 
provided by the Ministry of the Interior. In some cases, the costs are borne by users with the three electronic 
identity cards offered in Germany being funded by charging a one-time fee for their production.  
Establishing the operational model for digital identity 
Governments play an active role in building the identity footprint of an individual whether through their 
registration at birth, the issuing of identity documents like passports, or documenting someone’s 
relationship with the state for taxation, welfare or responsibility for a vehicle. As a result, the public sector 
is often a rich source of identity materials. It is therefore no surprise to see a majority of countries indicating 
a leading role for the public sector in the governance and provision of national digital identity solutions.  

18 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
In Argentina, Germany, Russia, Singapore and Spain, the model for digital identity relies on the public 
sector as the foundational actor in providing the basis for an issued digital identity. In Italy, the development 
of digital identity reflects a partnership between public and private sectors. Along these lines, Indonesia 
has collaborated with over 3 000 public and private stakeholders to integrate, verify, and validate data in 
the implementation of digital identity. Although these digital identities come from the public sector, all these 
countries ensure its availability and usage for accessing private sector services as one option among 
others. In Argentina and Singapore, the approach is even stronger with a public sector provided digital 
identity solution being relied on by both the public and private sectors. 
Several countries make use of biometrics as part of their digital identity solutions but solely biometric 
solutions are rare with only India’s Aardhaar system and Argentina’s SID entirely reliant on biometrics. In 
both countries, digital identity is an essential tool for citizens and enjoys near universal levels of adoption 
with the solutions embedded into services provided by both the public and private sectors.  
Australia, Italy and the United Kingdom are pursuing a federated model of digital identity. Under a federated 
approach identity infrastructure is not run by the government and users do not rely on a singular identity 
provided by the government. Instead, users register with an appropriate identity provider (IdP) who can 
verify an identity when needed. Under these models, the role of government is oversight and standards 
setting to cover the user experience and the protocols around identity proofing, verification and 
authentication. In Australia and Italy, IdPs are drawn from both the public and private sectors while, in the 
United Kingdom, IdPs are private sector suppliers. Unlike Italy, where SPID can be used for accessing 
private sector services, the digital identity solutions in Australia and the United Kingdom is limited to the 
access of public sector services only. However, these countries are actively considering how to expand 
their trust frameworks to include private sector services too. 
Turkey and Brazil have models where the digital identity solution for public services allows users to 
authenticate using the platforms of large banks, with the motive of promoting the uptake and use of digital 
services by those who already trust and use their bank’s solution. G20 members are open to the active 
role of non-government actors in the governance and development of digital identity with almost all 
respondents indicating the involvement of financial service providers and several additionally highlighting 
the role of telecoms providers and software companies. In Australia, Brazil and Germany there is also 
recognition of including academia. 
Setting standards and levels of assurance for digital identity 
No national digital identity solution is created without accounting for the existing identity landscape in a 
country. For all G20 members, this reflects those public sector efforts that have gone into securely 
demonstrating identity, whether through analogue means or previous digital efforts. It also needs to 
acknowledge private sector work for businesses to meet the needs of their customers. This landscape can 
mean that some services: 
• 
are designed to bypass digital identity by keeping the need for provable identity to a minimum 
• 
require individuals to provide information every time they access the service rather than reusing 
data held elsewhere 
• 
handle authentication and verification needs through a dedicated account or in issuing specific 
credentials for accessing specific services  
• 
operate under the basis of an organisational or sectoral approach to identity, for example all 
services provided for taxation may have a discrete solution for addressing their identity needs 
• 
reuse shared or federated solutions either from elsewhere in government or in provision from the 
private sector. 
• 
enable the exchange and reuse of verified credentials between existing sources of government 
data 

19 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
These different mechanisms for authenticating and verifying users reflect a value in differentiating between 
levels of assurance. The level of assurance describes the certainty to which a person using a digital identity 
solution can be trusted to actually be who they claim to be.  
The way in which countries define and manage levels of assurance draws on multilateral standards setting 
bodies such as the European Union (EU) and the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) as 
well as domestic organisations including the U.S National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 
The most commonly referenced standards include the EU eIDAS regulation and ISO-IEC 29115 on entity 
authentication assurance.  
These standards set out how to consider the definition in terms of identity proofing and authentication. 
Identity proofing levels of assurance are informed by factors such as how the initial identification takes 
place (remotely or in-person) and the attributes that are collected. Authentication levels of assurance 
determine the quantity of means of authentication (one-factor, two-factor or three-factor) used to confirm 
that an individual should be given access, the credentials collected and their cryptographic strength. Under 
NIST’s Digital Identity Guidelines (NIST 800-63-3), a third dimension has been added to consider the 
requirements for identification and authentication in federated environments and focuses on the nature of 
access to approved cryptography. Several countries, including Australia, Brazil (see Box 3.1), Italy and 
Singapore have digital identity solutions that make multiple tiers of assurance available, offering flexibility 
to both users and relying parties. 
Box 3.1. Identity proofing on the GOV.BR identity platform, Brazil 
In Brazil, citizens can use different methods to complete the online onboarding for a digital identity to 
access GOV.BR. All methods require citizens to have their tax identification number. 
Bronze category 
● 
Based on Knowledge-based Authentication (KBA), citizens must answer personal questions 
including questions related to their labour and pension records. 
Silver Category  
● 
Based on banking authentication, bank customers can, by means of bank digital identity login, 
identify themselves on the GOV.BR Identity platform. 
● 
Based on facial biometrics saved in the driver’s license database citizens can identify 
themselves using mobile phone cameras.  
Gold Category 
● 
Based on facial biometrics stored in the National Civil Identification (ICN) dataset identification 
can be done using a mobile phone camera. Currently, the database holds biometric data for 
118 million Brazilians. 
● 
Citizens can complete the onboarding process through the website address acesso.gov.br 
and have the support using the app (Meu gov.br) which is available at Google play and Apple 
Store. 
Source: OECD (2021), “G20 Digital Identity Survey” 
Higher levels of assurance are suitable where the priority is to minimise risk, but if an interaction is less 
open to abuse or security critical a lower standard may be applied in order to simplify the user experience. 
For example, biometric-based authentication provides a higher certainty of a user’s identity than many 

20 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
‘ordinary’ digital services will require. Ultimately, judging the appropriate level of assurance means finding 
a balance between mitigating risk and retaining usability in terms of: 
• 
the likelihood that any failure in the authentication process will release sensitive information,  
• 
the damage such a failure would cause to individuals, organisations or public trust  
• 
the overhead to the user (including their exclusion) or the service provider of meeting the 
requirement in order to access or provide a service.  
International standards that shape a global understanding of levels of assurance support countries to 
develop their own domestic standards for governing digital identity solutions. This is particularly important 
if the operational model for digital identity involves third parties in the identity proofing and authentication 
processes. In the United Kingdom, the national identity proofing standards draw on existing global 
standards and regulations, including the Pan Canadian Trust Framework Model29, in Italy the government 
assesses and certifies the quality of private identity providers for SPID through an accreditation process 
carried out by AgID, and in Australia the National Identity Proofing Guidelines and the Trusted Digital 
Identity Framework reference international standards to govern the activity of entities involved with 
delivering elements of the country’s digital identity solution. 
In Argentina, the biometric model for digital identity is unique amongst the participants in the survey and 
the most relevant standards that support this approach are drawn entirely from outside the country. The 
International Civil Aviation Organisation provides the basis for facial recognition and the United States’ 
NIST and Federal Bureau of Investigation do the same for fingerprints. 
The EU provides a further helpful illustration of how standards can unlock the opportunity for domestic 
approaches to digital identity to be usable elsewhere. Most of the digital identity solutions of EU member 
states are not using a federated model but the eIDAS regulation effectively creates a decentralised model 
for digital identity in order that 27 different domestic digital identity solutions can be reconciled to allow 
individual governments to rely on the efforts of their peers. The ambition underpinning eIDAS is for a citizen 
holding the digital identity of their country to access services provided by another. In June 2021 the 
European Commission published new proposals, building on the experience of the eIDAS regulation, to 
reflect developments and evolutions in the digital identity landscape to ensure that where citizens are 
reusing identity across borders it is as seamless and effective as possible. 
User experience 
For citizens, the ability to use a single, secure identity solution across services and platforms has the 
potential to increase the incentives to obtain a digital identity. Several countries have challenges in the 
implementation of digital identity solutions that result from past efforts to digitise analogue identity 
processes.  
For countries with a national ID card the first e-ID solutions could upgrade these existing models to include 
smart chips. Although these cards could now hold more extensive information they required card readers 
to be usable. To overcome these usability challenges public and private sector organisations developed 
their own technical solutions for identifying and verifying users. Although these were not as robust as the 
solutions using ID cards a trade-off was made in favour of usability to meet their immediate needs.  
The priority given to usability can be seen in Brazil, where the digital identity system integrates with the 
authentication platforms of large banks. According to their experience, one of the most valuable lessons 
has been a model based around the idea of “one citizen, one identity and authentication solution for all 
digital government services”. As digital identity becomes ubiquitous in the domestic context, the 
                                                
29 Developed by the Digital ID and Authentication Council of Canada (DIACC) 

21 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
expectation of citizens will increase to allow citizens and businesses to easily prove their identities to 
access public and private sector services provided across borders, as is imagined by eIDAS in the EU. 
Table 3.2. What the national digital identity can be used for 
 
Authentication for accessing 
public sector services 
Authentication for accessing 
private sector services 
As proof of legal identity  
Argentina 
X 
X 
 
Australia 
X 
 
 
Brazil 
X 
 
 
Germany 
X 
X 
X 
Italy 
X 
X 
X 
Indonesia 
X 
X 
 
Mexico 
X 
 
 
Russia 
X 
 
 
Saudi Arabia 
X 
 
 
Singapore 
X 
X 
 
Spain 
X 
X 
X 
Turkey 
X 
 
 
United Kingdom 
X 
 
 
Note: Information is not available for Canada, China, France, India, Japan, Korea, South Africa and the United States of America. Information 
was also provided by Democratic Republic of Congo and Mexico where digital identity solutions are currently under development 
Source: OECD (2021), “G20 Digital Identity Survey”, desk research.  
The first step for users to obtain their digital identity is identity proofing. In eight of the surveyed countries, 
this is possible through an online-only process. When it comes to the user experience of activating a digital 
identity, security and levels of assurance should be balanced against the ease of the experience for users. 
Germany does not currently have an online-only process but the Federal Government is developing a 
Smart-eID solution that will work without creating a physical ID card. The Smart-eID will store the identity 
data that would be contained in the smart card in a security element or the eSIM of a smartphone. The 
phone could then be used for identification on the Internet without using the ID card. 
Means of authentication  
Another important part of providing a seamless user experience of digital identity are the means of 
authentication individuals and businesses can use. Some of these solutions support the cross-platform 
ambitions of governments to support mobile devices. Nevertheless, digital identity solutions need to be 
accessible to all of society and reflect the experience and needs of vulnerable populations, including elderly 
and disabled people, as well as those with limited access to stable internet. 
Smartcards 
Five of the surveyed countries use smartcards as a means for authentication and verification with Indonesia 
considering the potential for its future use. The use of smartcards is often indicative of upgrading physical 
identity documents rather than rethinking identification processes for cross-sectoral, cross-platform and 
cross-border use. In Germany, Italy and Spain, the national identity smartcards are acceptable as valid 
identity documents which can present a challenge in trying to migrate from physical cards to mobile 
solutions. In Germany and Italy, authentication using smartcards is possible through Near-Field 
Communication (NFC) enabled smartphones and avoids the need for card reading hardware, however the 
initial creation of the cards is currently dependent on a face-to-face process although Germany’s Smart-
eID plans would address this. Having a physical card may help individuals trust their digital identity and 

22 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
feel greater security and reliability while for others it may be a barrier to adoption due to their frustration of 
having to carry a physical card. 
Digital certificates and e-signatures 
Digital certificates provide proof of ownership over a public key, also known as identity certificates or public 
key infrastructure. Today, digital certificates are being deployed in eight of the surveyed countries. In Spain, 
the public sector eID gateway Cl@ve which provides access to digital public services allows the use of 
username and password and digital certificates (including DNIe) for authentication. In Brazil, digital 
certificates are being used by private sector organisations who access government services from the 
Brazilian Federal Revenue Office.  
The role of e-signatures can be particularly relevant for facilitating business and public sector processes, 
where qualified e-signatures can be regarded as equivalent to handwritten signatures to prove authorship. 
This is the case in Germany and Italy, two countries covered by the standards introduced through the EU’s 
eIDAS regulation to ensure the secure and consistent use of e-signatures. In Singapore, 64% of the 
population that has a digital identity uses e-signatures and each month account for 37 000 authentications. 
In Argentina, the digital signature is used in applications and official systems of the National Public Service 
and is facilitated by Remote Digital Signature Platform (PDRF). 
Username and password 
The most familiar online authentication processes use usernames and passwords and this is a popular 
approach for digital identity solutions with countries adopting this approach including Brazil, Germany, Italy, 
Russia, Singapore and Spain. This means of authentication is considered useful for people with basic 
digital skills and for accessing services where a failure in the identity process would result in a negligible 
damage. However, while this may be an intuitive approach for some people, there is a reliance on 
individuals to remember their credentials without storing them insecurely. As such, single-factor 
authentication solutions offer less protection against fraudulent use of digital identity.  
Two-factor authentication 
Two-factor authentication (2FA) offers an extra level of security in ensuring the people trying to access a 
service are who they say they are. 2FA can be a valuable way of increasing security without harming the 
user experience by removing the need for physical cards or specific hardware. Italy, one of the countries 
that identified the use of usernames and passwords, increases their level of security by requiring 2FA.  
2FA solutions can confirm access to an email account, a mobile phone number or a mobile device or they 
can involve matching biometric information. A majority of the surveyed countries use 2FA to confirm access 
to either a mobile phone number or mobile device. In Italy, the use of 2FA to confirm access to a mobile 
phone number reflects the country’s strategy of moving towards an increasingly mobile digital government 
that values the portability and availability of digital identities on mobile devices. 
Biometrics 
The introduction of new digital technologies for collecting biometric data, whether facial recognition, iris 
scanning, voice printing or fingerprinting, has been embraced by six of the surveyed countries as part of 
their 2FA solutions.  
From a user perspective, biometric authentication can be a practical, reliable and fast way to prove identity 
given that biometric data cannot be forgotten, lost, or easily changed. Yet, for the same reason, there are 
important challenges in ensuring privacy and citizens’ ultimate control over their personal information. This 
includes the risk of the collected biometric data being used for purposes other than was originally agreed. 

23 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
The risks and controversy surrounding the use of biometrics require governments and service providers to 
set up and comply with data management, privacy and data protection protocols, as well as reflect 
appropriate principles for ethical use30 in order to safeguard the integrity of the digital identity systems and 
its end-users. 
Argentina is unique among the surveyed countries in having a digital identity solution that is entirely reliant 
on biometric markers for facial recognition and fingerprint scanning held in the central National Registry of 
People (Registro Nacional de las Personas, RENAPER). Brazil, Germany, Saudi Arabia, Singapore and 
Turkey also augment their digital identity solutions with biometric information.  
Table 3.3. Means for authentication 
  
Smartcard 
using a card 
reader  
Digital 
certificate file 
or similar 
E-
signatures 
Username 
and 
password 
2FA email 
account 
2FA mobile 
phone 
number 
2FA 
mobile 
device 
2FA biometric 
information 
Argentina 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
Australia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
Brazil 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
Germany 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Indonesia 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
Italy 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
Russia 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
Saudi 
Arabia 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
Singapore 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
Spain 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
Turkey 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
United 
Kingdom 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
Note: Information is not available for Canada, China, France, India, Japan, Korea, South Africa and the United States of America. Information 
was also provided by Democratic Republic of Congo and Mexico where digital identity solutions are currently under development 
Source: OECD (2021), “G20 Digital Identity Survey”. Information is based on a country’s answer to the question “When users in your country 
access Digital Identity solution(s) for authentication and verification, what methods for authentication does it use?” 
Data privacy, visibility and user consent 
Digital identity is a potential vulnerability in terms of accessing highly sensitive information about individuals 
and their lives. To enable the trustworthy adoption of digital identity, and allow for elevating the standards 
of digital identity around the world, it is non-negotiable for data protection, digital security and citizen 
consent to be prioritised. 
Legislation to protect personal identifiable data and oversight authority 
Data protection was a dominant theme in the survey responses with almost all respondents having data 
protection legislation in place to protect the processing of personal identifiable data in DI systems. In 
Indonesia where the feasibility for improving digital identity and personal data protection is underway, the 
intent is to ensure a close working relationship between the two, drawing on international experiences and 
standards in this area. 
                                                
30 OECD Good Practice Principles of Data Ethics in the Public Sector https://www.oecd.org/gov/digital-
government/good-practice-principles-for-data-ethics-in-the-public-sector.htm 

24 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
In countries where there are no single central records with unique personal identifiers, and where this 
approach is purposefully avoided, as in Australia and the United Kingdom, dedicated trust frameworks can 
be formed to supplement existing privacy and data protection legislation. In Australia, the Trusted Digital 
Identity Framework (TDIF) was developed to ensure that personal data entering the Australian 
Government Digital Identity system is subject to stringent privacy protections. The TDIF contains a number 
of privacy specific rules, including rules which require accredited participants to: 
• 
conduct privacy impact assessment for high risk changes to their system,  
• 
have privacy officers and privacy champions,  
• 
only use behavioural information in certain ways, and  
• 
seek explicit and informed consent before sharing an individual’s attributes with a relying party. 
The TDIF has requirements that disallow accredited providers from disclosing a user’s data without their 
consent. It also has requirements that prevent organisations from using personal information for direct 
marketing purposes.  
In order to ensure trust in digital identity systems, there is a need to establish organisations and 
mechanisms to oversee the impact of digital identity on individual privacy and freedoms, and take 
appropriate action in case things go wrong. This role is often assigned to National Data Protection 
Authorities who have a broader mandate than digital identity. In the majority of cases these bodies are 
independent, have onsite and offsite investigatory and sanctioning powers to safeguard accountability for 
the appropriate processing of personal data in digital identity systems. 
Table 3.4. Authority that monitors and oversees the impact of DI on individual privacy and 
freedoms 
  
There is an authority that monitors 
and oversees the impact of DI on 
individual privacy and freedoms 
The authority is 
independent 
The authority has onsite 
and offsite investigatory 
power 
The authority has 
sanctioning power 
Argentina 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Australia 
Yes 
Yes 
- 
- 
Brazil 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Democratic Republic 
of Congo 
No 
- 
- 
- 
Indonesia 
Yes 
Yes 
- 
- 
Italy 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Mexico 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Russia 
Yes 
Yes 
- 
- 
Saudi Arabia 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Spain 
Yes 
Yes 
- 
- 
Turkey 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
United Kingdom 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Note: Information is not available for Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Japan, Korea, Singapore, South Africa and the United States of 
America. 
Source: OECD (2021), “G20 Digital Identity Survey”. Information is based on a country’s answer to the questions “In your country, is there an 
authority that monitors and oversees the impact of Digital Identity on individual privacy and freedoms?”; “If yes, is this authority independent?”; 
“If yes, does this authority have onsite and offsite investigatory power?”; “If yes, does this authority have sanctioning power?” 
To overcome the challenges of trust over the use of data, countries are developing models that restrict 
unnecessary data collection, promote visibility of what data is being processed, and seek consent. In the 
United States, the federal government is working to recognize identities from the state and local levels to 
enable secure digital access to federal services while prioritizing privacy, minimizing data collection, and 
ensuring user consent before data is used or shared. This includes firewalling to ensure that data is not 

25 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
shared with agencies who do not need access to the data to provide the service requested, as well as 
avoiding the collection of data to provide a service where that data is not necessary. 
In Germany, after the connection between the ID card and the smartphone or the card reader has been 
established, the user receives information about which provider has requested data and the specific data 
that is involved. Before any transfer of data the user makes an informed choice about giving their 
confirmation, or refusing to do so. The issuing authority for authorisation certificates in the Federal Office 
of Administration grants service providers the state authorisation to read out the identification data from 
the national online ID when fulfilling the requirements. In Turkey, according to the country’s data protection 
law, natural persons whose personal data are processed have a right to request data to controllers within 
the scope of their rights specified in law. The law establishes several rights, including knowing whether 
personal data is processed or not, the purpose of processing data, to whom personal data is transferred, 
and to request the erasure or destruction of the data. In Singapore, users can access their transaction 
history in the Singpass app to see what attributes or data are shared, and with whom. When it comes to 
accessing biometric data, users are required to give consent for their facial image to be compared against 
the Government’s biometric database for authentication purposes.  
A further evolution in the approach to digital identity is offered by self-sovereign identity and verifiable 
credentials. These technologies offers possibilities for empowering users with greater control over their 
digital identities in deciding what data they want to share, and with whom. Although its use is being explored 
in Germany, Italy, Saudi Arabia and Spain, none of the surveyed countries have yet implemented such a 
system. 
Table 3.5. Data visibility and consent 
  
Citizens are proactively 
informed by authorities 
about any processing of 
their personally identifiable 
data 
Users of DI can access 
and see what attributes or 
data are being shared/re-
used, and with/by whom 
Users can provide and 
revoke consent for the re-
use and sharing of 
attributes or data 
originating from their DI 
Civil society organisations 
are monitoring the process by 
which a person's identifiable 
data is shared and reused 
Argentina 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Australia 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
- 
Brazil 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Germany 
Yes 
Yes 
- 
No 
Italy 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Mexico 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
- 
Russia 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Saudi Arabia 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Singapore 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
- 
Spain 
Yes 
- 
Yes 
- 
Turkey 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
United 
Kingdom 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Note: Information is not available for Canada, China, France, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, South Africa and the United States of America. 
Information was also provided by Democratic Republic of Congo where digital identity and data protection approaches are currently under 
development. 
Source: OECD (2021), “G20 Digital Identity Survey”. Information is based on a country’s answer to the question “In your country, are citizens 
proactively informed by authorities about any processing of their personally identifiable data?”; “In your country, can users of Digital Identity 
access and see what attributes or data are being shared/re-used, and with/by whom?”; “In your country, can users provide and revoke consent 
for the re-use and sharing of attributes or data originating from their Digital Identity?”; “In your country, are civil society organisations monitoring 
the process by which a person's identifiable data is shared and reused?” 

26 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
Adoption 
Underpinning the implementation of digital identity efforts in G20 member countries is the expectation for 
a digital identity to be adopted and put to use among citizens. Most of the time, high rates of adoption are 
presented as a measure of success, yet understanding and defining what to measure is complex, 
especially when comparing countries. Not all citizens or businesses may want or choose to use the 
available digital identity solution and several countries provide their citizens with the legal right to opt out, 
meaning that 100% adoption may never be achieved. Within the European Union, the EU Commission has 
settled on the target of seeing 80% uptake amongst citizens by 203031. In Italy, the Strategy 'Italia 2026' 
aims at increasing the uptake of digital identity in Italy by 70% of the adult population by 2026. 
Mandating use  
In some jurisdictions, efforts are focused on making the adoption and use of a particular digital identity 
mandatory. In Brazil and Saudi Arabia, this mandation is applied to citizens, requiring that they sign up to 
the specified digital identity solution to access certain services, while in Australia, Germany, Italy, Spain, 
Turkey, and the United Kingdom, citizens can opt out.  
An alternative approach, as seen in Brazil, Germany, Italy, Singapore, Spain and Turkey, is to require that 
public sector organisations use the specified digital identity solution when designing and delivering public 
services. Although this appears to effectively mandate citizens to adopt the same digital identity solution, 
these countries provide alternative solutions for those who have not adopted digital identity themselves.  
As part of promoting the uptake of digital identity, many governments provide resources for service 
providers to facilitate their onboarding. These can include guidelines, training, software and standards. 
Germany’s Federal Ministry of the Interior, Building and Community provides information to authorities on 
the portal personalausweisportal.de describing how the online identification function can be integrated into 
processes. This also includes technical information as well as contact details of eID service providers and 
identification service providers. The Bundesdruckerei Group supports federal authorities that want to 
establish their own eID infrastructure for electronic identification with the online ID function, by providing a 
central eID service, the required authorisation certificates and SSL/TLS certificates as well as technical 
integration into existing IT systems.  
In Argentina and Brazil, technical teams exist to support public agencies in implementing the digital identity 
solutions. In Spain, resources such as integration packages are available and there is support to help the 
public sector teams. In Spain, the common platform for identification and authentication Cl@ve prevents 
public sector organisations from having to implement and manage their own identification and signature 
systems, and citizens having to use different identification methods to interact electronically with the 
Administration. In Singapore, non-public sector teams can access the Singpass API portal to access 
resources to onboard onto the various Singpass products. These resources include an API library, 
onboarding tutorials and guidelines, technical specifications, implementation templates and sandbox APIs 
to encourage ease of onboarding.   
 
 
                                                
31 2030 Digital Compass https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/digital-compass     
 

27 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
Table 3.6. Mandatory use of available DI solution(s) for service user authentication and verification 
by public sector organisations 
Country 
Mandatory 
Argentina 
No 
Australia 
No 
Brazil 
Yes 
Germany 
Yes 
Italy 
Yes 
Russia 
No 
Saudi Arabia 
Yes 
Singapore 
Yes 
Spain 
Yes 
Turkey 
Yes 
United Kingdom 
No 
Note: Information is not available for Canada, China, France, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Mexico, South Africa and the United States of 
America. Information was also provided by Democratic Republic of Congo and Mexico where digital identity solutions are currently under 
development. 
Source: OECD (2021), “G20 Digital Identity Survey”. Information is based on a country’s answer to the question “In your country, is it mandatory 
for central/federal public sector organisations to use available Digital Identity solution(s) for service user authentication and verification?” 
Measuring adoption 
The numbers involved with the adoption of digital identity can be highly impressive with Indonesia reporting 
that the verification process carried out by the country’s Ministry of Home Affairs has been completed 7 
billion times. However, these numbers are not always so easy to report, particularly where countries have 
multiple digital identity solutions. For example, in Italy, citizens can have accounts with one, or both, of the 
SPID or CIE solutions while in the United Kingdom, the GOV.UK Verify model gives citizens the choice of 
being able to use multiple identity providers as they prefer. By creating an ecosystem of digital identity in 
this way, citizens have choice and there is flexibility of approaches in using a particular digital identity for 
some services, and other digital identities for others. This gives greater control to the individual user over 
their activities but makes it harder to numerate the adoption figures of digital identity.   
Efforts to measure adoption can furthermore be misleading as not every public service and not every 
citizen may require high levels of assurance – for example, obtaining a fishing permit is not the same as 
securing welfare payments or completing a tax return. Therefore, to understand the adoption of digital 
identity means considering the opportunities and relevance for digital identity in relation to available public 
services. As such, there is a need to complement underlying figures with a rounded understanding of the 
total addressable market in terms of existing digital identity solutions that may be in use as well as the 
categorisation of available services according to their needs in terms of assurance.  
One factor in encouraging adoption is proactively informing the public about the availability of new services 
accessible with the use of the national digital identity solution. In Italy, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the 
government used the press, television and social media to share news of COVID-19 recovery packages 
that could be accessed via digital identity, which resulted in a boost of user adoption. 
Another factor is the initial process by which citizens are able to obtain a digital identity. In some countries 
this is triggered by the citizen having need of a public service and then following through with the sign-up 
procedure. Where this can be done remotely, as in eight of the surveyed countries, there is no barrier to 
adoption with users being able to immediately continue with resolving their need. However, if the enrolment 
process requires proving biometric markers then a face-to-face interaction may be required which can be 
a stumbling block and a bottleneck for adoption. Under these models, such as that of Argentina, there is 
merit in encouraging users to activate their digital identity even before they need to use it as well as working 
to develop solutions for activating a digital identity remotely.  

28 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
During the COVID-19 pandemic many governments developed new, or extended existing, public services 
focusing on welfare payments that did require high levels of assurance and, as countries went through 
extended periods of lockdown and enforced remote interaction, the importance of a reliable and adoptable 
digital identity solution came to the fore. With mandatory digital identity in place, Argentina could already 
report 95% adoption rates prior to the pandemic, a situation that allowed for the ready distribution of 
financial aid throughout the country. However, in the other countries Figure 3.1 shows the significant 
change occasioned by the pandemic with Italy, Brazil and Singapore reporting the largest percentage point 
increase between December 2019 and April 2021, ranging from 43 in Singapore, to 29 in Italy. When 
looking at the percentage increase in adoption, as seen in Figure 3.2, the estimated rate of change in the 
share of the eligible population with a digital identity is most dramatic in Australia where growth was 1 
662%. These increases are linked to the provision of new services on digital platforms, especially in those 
countries where digital identity solutions support both public and private sector services.  
Figure 3.1. Adoption of digital identity among the population, 2019 compared to 2021 
% of eligible population 
 
Note: Data is not available for Canada, China, France, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Russia, South Africa and the United States of 
America. Information was also provided by Democratic Republic of Congo, Indonesia and Mexico where digital identity solutions are currently 
under development. 
Source: OECD (2021), “G20 Digital Identity Survey”. Adoption is calculated as a percentage of the eligible population (based on age) with a 
digital identity, and information is collected from the answer to “What is the youngest age at which someone can have a Digital Identity in your 
country?” and “The total population in your country that had a Digital Identity on 1st December 2019:” and “The total population in your country 
that had a Digital Identity on 1stApril 2021:” Data on the total eligible population in the United Kingdom is collected from the UK Office for National 
Statistics (ONS).  
95%
1%
26%
49%
11%
66%
70%
11%
21%
95%
11%
57%
61%
40%
86%
84%
16%
64%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Germany
Italy
Saudi Arabia
Turkey
United
Kingdom
Singapore
Population adoption of Digital Identity prior to COVID (December 2019)
Population adoption of Digital Identity in April 2021

29 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
Figure 3.2. Percentage increase in adoption among the population, 2019 compared to 2021 
 
Note: Data is not available for Canada, China, France, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Russia, South Africa and the United States of 
America. Information was also provided by Democratic Republic of Congo, Indonesia and Mexico where digital identity solutions are currently 
under development. 
Source: OECD (2021), “G20 Digital Identity Survey”. Calculated based on data collected from country’s answer to “What is the youngest age at 
which someone can have a Digital Identity in your country?” and “The total population in your country that had a Digital Identity on 1st December 
2019:” and “The total population in your country that had a Digital Identity on 1st April 2021:” Data on the total eligible population in the United 
Kingdom is collected from the UK Office for National Statistics (ONS). 
Portability 
A majority of the surveyed G20 members are working on cross-platform, cross-sectoral and cross-border 
portability to some extent. Portability is an increasing necessity for the effective use of a digital identity 
across services, platforms and geographical borders. The way to achieve this may include the need to 
update regulatory and legal frameworks and to strengthen the basis for cross-border and international 
identity efforts and collaboration. 
Table 3.7. Current levels of portability of digital identity 
 
Cross-platform  
Cross-sectoral 
Cross-border  
Argentina 
 
X 
 
Australia 
X 
 
 
Brazil  
X 
 
 
Germany  
X 
X 
X 
Italy  
X 
 
X 
 
X 
Russia 
X 
 
 
Saudi Arabia  
X 
X 
X 
Singapore 
X 
X 
 
Spain  
 
X 
X 
Turkey 
X 
 
 
United Kingdom  
X 
 
 
Note: Information is not available for Canada, China, France, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Mexico, South Africa and the United States of 
America. 
Source: OECD (2021), “G20 Digital Identity Survey”, desk research.  
0%
1662%
116%
26%
269%
31%
21%
49%
210%
0%
50%
100%
150%
200%
250%
300%
350%
400%
Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Germany
Italy
Saudi Arabia
Turkey
United
Kingdom
Singapore

30 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
Cross-platform portability 
A majority of countries are moving away from smartcard-based models of digital identity as alternative 
approaches offer improved usability, especially in terms of cross-platform portability. Nine of the surveyed 
countries enable users to access digital identity through a mobile device which is not device specific. In 
Italy, SPID can be used through a mobile application on any mobile device and CIE can be used with 
mobile devices containing Near-Field Communication (NFC) technology. Fully mobile digital identity is a 
priority for Italy and will involve closer collaboration with Mobile Network Operators. The Australian 
Government’s digital identity system for accessing public service is also available through a mobile 
application - the myGovID app - on any mobile device and is considered cross-platform portable. The app 
myGovID can be downloaded on Apple App Store and Google Play.  
In Singapore, in addition to the national digital identity for individuals Singpass and the Corporate Digital 
Identity for businesses Corppass, the government is progressively building a mobile version of a Corporate 
Digital Identity for businesses. This with the aim to cater for the increasing volume of electronic corporate 
transactions by introducing a corporate alternative to an individual’s digital identity and enabling 
corporations to leverage the government’s digital signature products. 
Cross-sectoral portability 
There is a growing consensus about the value for citizens and businesses to use digital identity across 
sectors and services, whether it may be to apply for a loan, complete digital payments, book a doctor’s 
appointment, or declare taxes. However, only 50% of the surveyed countries provide such a cross-sector 
portable digital identity solution. Argentina, Germany, Italy, Saudi Arabia, Singapore and Spain all reported 
that their digital identity solution can be used for accessing both public and private sector services.  
In Argentina and Singapore, the national digital identity solutions can be used to access both public and 
private sector services. Non-public sector teams can access the APIs underpinning the solutions in both 
countries. In Argentina the same level of support for private sector teams is provided as to public sector 
teams with 24/7 help available. In Singapore, support resources include an API library, onboarding tutorials 
and guidelines, technical specifications, implementation templates and sandbox APIs to encourage ease 
of onboarding.  
In Italy, while private sector service providers can use the national digital identity SPID to authenticate 
service users, only between 1-24% are currently doing so. The remaining services are using identification 
through personal credentials via websites or mobile apps or in-person identification through paper 
documents. The case of Italy points to the fact that promoting the onboarding of service providers is equally 
important as providing a cross-sectoral identity solution and this requires having a complete view of the 
market of available identity solutions.   
Cross-border portability 
The ability to use digital identities across geographical boundaries and borders has been raised a priority 
by the G20 membership, and several countries are looking into developing mutually recognised digital 
identities through trust frameworks, internationally recognised standards as well as new technologies that 
can help facilitate its realisation. Today, the EU (and therefore Germany, Italy and Spain) and Saudi Arabia 
are the only members who have integrated cross-border digital identity solutions. Nevertheless, several 
countries, including Argentina, Australia and Singapore are exploring how to establish such solutions. 
Australia and Singapore are working on establishing mutually recognised trust frameworks through the 

31 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
Australia-Singapore Digital Economy Agreement (DEA)32, and New Zealand, Singapore and Chile through 
the Digital Economy Partnership Agreement (DEPA)33 signed in 2020. In Latin America, there is no solution 
in place but Argentina, Costa Rica and Colombia developed proofs of concept under the framework of the 
Latin American and Caribbean Council of Civil Registry, Identity and Vital Statistics. 
As member of the regional Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), Saudi Arabia is collaborating with Bahrain, 
Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates to integrate the member states’ different 
digital identity systems. As of today, the digital identity system of Bahrain is fully integrated with the Saudi 
digital identity system and Saudi Arabia is in the process of integrating its system also with the remaining 
countries. When agreeing to mutual recognition between countries, Saudi Arabia uses legislation and 
policy mapping to establish the extent to which privacy protection and data security approaches of the 
other country are consistent with their domestic policies. GCC countries share some mandatory laws or 
model laws that facilitate this process. 
In the EU, as presented throughout this report, the eIDAS regulation and associated implementing 
regulation provided the regulatory framework and standards necessary to achieve technical and cross-
border interoperability between the EU Member States. Italy, Spain and Germany who are all part of the 
EU, have digital identity systems notified under eIDAS, which allow them to be used in other countries 
within the EU, and for other EU member digital identities to be used for authentication in order to access 
domestic services. Although the United Kingdom had previously notified its digital identity solution under 
eIDAS, following Brexit the country is no longer party to these arrangements. As expressed by the United 
Kingdom, in order for the country to be able to agree on mutual recognition of digital identity with another 
country, compliance with the United Kingdom’s GDPR and an adequacy determination by assessing the 
data protection and security approaches of another country would first be necessary.  
Cross-border portability is not just relevant between countries but can also cover other administrative and 
jurisdiction boundaries. Many public services that require proof of identity are provided by local, regional 
or state governments. In the United States, identities are generated at the State government level and 
used to create state government level identity credentials. At the federal level, the US government is 
working to recognise identities from the state and local levels to enable secure digital access to federal 
services. As with EU Member States that adhere to specific standards and practices in order for their digital 
identities to be recognised and verified within the union, the work of the United States federal government 
attempts to address the fragmentation of digital identity systems to simplify the ability for citizens to access 
services, without establishing a centrally controlled system or database.  
 
 
                                                
32 https://www.dfat.gov.au/trade/services-and-digital-trade/australia-and-singapore-digital-economy-agreement  
33https://www.mti.gov.sg/Improving-Trade/Digital-Economy-Agreements/The-Digital-Economy-Partnership-
Agreement  

32 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
Table 3.8. Implemented or plans for cross-border digital identity 
 
Number of countries where non-citizens 
can use their domestic digital identity to 
authenticate themselves for accessing 
public services 
List of countries  
Region of 
recognised digital 
identities 
Germany 
8 
Belgium, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Italy, 
Latvia, Malta, Netherlands 
Europe 
Italy 
23 
Portugal, Finland, Croatia, Austria, Denmark, United 
Kingdom, Luxembourg, Latvia, Slovenia, Netherlands, 
Slovakia, Czechia, Ireland, Lithuania, Malta, Spain, 
Estonia, Sweden, Greece, Cyprus, Germany, Belgium, 
and Norway. 
Europe 
Saudi Arabia 
1 
Bahrain 
Gulf Cooperation 
Council 
Spain 
13 
Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Estonia, Croatia, 
Belgium, Portugal, Netherlands, Czech Republic, 
Latvia, Slovakia, Denmark, Lithuania. 
Europe 
 
 
 
 
Argentina 
Exploratory – not implemented 
Colombia, Costa Rica 
Latin American and 
Caribbean Council 
of Civil Registry, 
Identity and Vital 
Statistics 
Australia 
Exploratory - not implemented 
Singapore, New Zealand 
South East Asia, 
Oceania 
Singapore 
Exploratory - not implemented 
Australia, Chile, New Zealand  
South East Asia, 
Oceania 
Note: Information is not available for Canada, China, France, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Mexico, South Africa and the United States. 
Information was also provided by Democratic Republic of Congo, Indonesia and Mexico where digital identity solutions are currently under 
development. 
Source: OECD (2021), “G20 Digital Identity Survey”, desk research.  
Priorities for future developments 
Legislation and policy  
As countries work to develop digital identity systems that are fit for the 21st century, governments are 
considering how to adjust the regulatory framework, policies and identity standards for digital identity. In 
the United Kingdom, the government is developing digital identity standards to promote an enabling identity 
market. In February 2021, the government published a prototype of the UK digital identity and attributes 
Trust Framework, which contains rules on privacy and data protection, fraud management, security, and 
making sure products and services are inclusive. The trust framework has initially been published as an 
alpha in order to be tested with services, industries, organisations and potential users. The next version of 
the trust framework, its beta phase, will be published over the course of 2021. The United Kingdom’s 
government is also preparing to consult on digital identity legislation with proposals for a governing body 
to own and manage the trust framework to build public and industry confidence in this new market.  
Australia and Saudi Arabia are also working on updating legislation related to digital identity. Saudi Arabia 
is updating the e-transaction law (draft Digital Transactions and Trust Services Law) to add more legal 
provisions related to digital identities and trust services, and to harmonize with other international laws like 
e-IDAS and UN model laws. As a complement to new regulatory instruments, Saudi Arabia is also 
developing a national strategy for digital identity, covering governance model, digital identity and trust 
services, operating model and service delivery, standards, return on investment and liquidation, and 

33 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
technical architecture. In Australia, the government is consulting on a proposal for legislation to extend the 
Trusted Digital Identity Framework (TDIF) beyond federal government agencies to state and territory 
agencies and the private sector. 
Plans for cross-border portability 
There are several plans across the surveyed courtiers for improving the way in which digital identity 
solutions can be used across sectors and borders, which includes taking note of global experiences in the 
design and delivery of digital identity and explore the potential of mutually recognised trust frameworks. 
The Government of Australia is looking into opportunities of mutually recognising Trust Frameworks with 
the governments of Singapore and New Zealand. Australia notes that mutual recognition is a complex 
challenge that will take several years to complete and the Digital Transformation Agency is using a phased 
approach to mutual recognition, derived from the European Union’s Interoperability Framework and 
adapted from the World Bank’s Digital Identity Practitioners Guide. Singapore is also looking to establish 
cross border interoperability with other countries, and the government recognises the importance of 
identification in cross-border transactions, such as visa applications, business registrations, which are 
onerous and time-consuming, and which could be addressed by having interoperable Digital Identities.  
Decentralised identity 
Several countries are exploring the possibility of implementing decentralised or self-sovereign identity (SSI) 
systems. In Europe, the proposed framework for a European Digital Identity by the EU Commission 
(Proposal for a Regulation amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 as regards to establishing a framework 
for a European Digital Identity (COM(2021) 281 final) on 3 June 2021 is helping to drive this work. Through 
the framework, European Digital Identity wallets will enable people to choose which aspects of their 
identity, data and certificates they share with third parties, and to keep track of it. Several Member States 
have made use of the Recovery and Resilience Facility financial support to public investments and 
reforms34 to work on implementing the proposed framework. In Germany, one interdepartmental initiative 
with the participation of the Federal Chancellery is working to build an SSI-based eID ecosystem and in 
another, technical solutions are being tested, harmonized and prepared for rollout in four large-scale 
showcase projects together with citizens, municipalities and SMEs over 2021-2024. Other countries which 
have plans on pursuing decentralised identity include Singapore and Saudi Arabia.  
                                                
34 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_21_2663  

34 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
Although G20 members have different priorities and methodologies for the development of digital identity 
there are five areas in which their experience can be understood as aligning for some overall observations. 
Firstly, unlocking the role of digital identity in society is linked to the availability of opportunities to put 
digital identity to use. There is limited value in a digital identity that is not integrated into the day to day 
life of citizens. As such, there is value in making it as easy as possible for service providers to implement 
and integrate the national digital identity solution. Moreover, the pursuit of digital identity solutions that can 
straddle the public and private sectors to offer citizens a seamless route to proving their identity can help 
digital identity become a ubiquitous habit, rather than an occasional experience.  
Secondly, when citizens are given those opportunities to use digital identity they need to be supported by 
the quality of the user experience in doing so. When it comes to someone’s experience of the initial 
enrolment as well as the ongoing experience, the most effective digital identities are transformative in the 
services they enable, and the experience they offer a citizen. 
Thirdly, a crucial part of determining the quality of a user’s experience with digital identity, and the 
opportunities it affords, is the role of digital identity in the citizen’s ownership and visibility of how 
their data is being used once authentication has been achieved. Some countries are providing 
opportunities for citizens to audit the access and use of their data and others are using their digital identity 
solution as the mechanism by which they surface and secure consents. The architecture of federated 
models (such as those found in Australia, Italy, the United Kingdom, the United States and to some extent 
under the provisions of eIDAS within the European Union) avoids creating a single joined-up view of data 
access for an individual. This reflects a deliberate decision to emphasise individual rights to privacy and 
ensure there is no scope for overall government oversight into an individual citizens’ habits and behaviours. 
Fourthly, this question of protecting data and privacy underlines the critical importance of the 
governance for digital identity. This governance helps to ensure effective legal frameworks for 
supporting a country’s approach to digital identity and the associated implications of the exchange and 
access to data. In addition, digital identity relies on leadership to establish a vision to unlock its full 
transformational potential as well as the resources (financial, technical and human) to support that vision 
being made a reality. There is a clear pattern from the experiences of the countries discussed in this paper 
to look to how a central function handling both strategic leadership and delivery oversight can underpin 
digital identity solutions and help to work through the challenges associated with exploring compatibility of 
solutions developed under different jurisdictions 
These four points all contribute to outcomes that are citizen focused and built on a foundation for achieving 
the portability of digital identity: digital identity is of most value when citizens can authenticate and 
verify their identity as easily as possible in any given context. This surfaces the importance of three 
key tenets in the discussion of digital identity. 
1. It is important that Digital Identity solutions work on a cross-platform basis: that is, they 
work when individuals are in front of a desktop computer in their home or accessing services on 
the move via their mobile phone. 
2. It is important that Digital Identity solutions work on a cross-sectoral basis: that is, public 
services can recognise digital identity solutions that can also be used in the private sector. As has 
4 Concluding observations 

35 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
been seen, there are multiple models of digital identity that countries can choose to use and 
whether public sector identities are recognised for private services, or vice versa, the pursuit of 
coherent frameworks towards trusted identities are essential for minimising confusing duplication 
for citizens and increasing the overall trustworthiness of digital identity in society. 
3. It is important that Digital Identity solutions operate effectively on a cross-border basis. 
There are many advantages to governments in recognising the validity of digital identities originally 
provisioned by another country or jurisdiction.  
This paper describes the experience of digital identity within the G20 and highlights the different lessons 
and opportunities found in these varied approaches. Digital identity can be an important enabler for 
addressing some of the challenges facing the world in the aftermath of COVID-19, not only in the domestic 
context but across borders too.  
The G20 provides a valuable forum to explore greater cross-border cooperation to meet the needs of 
societies and economies. In the twenty-first century, many of those needs can be traced back to the need 
for reliable and portable digital identity. Whether it is meeting the needs of diaspora communities looking 
to simplify their integration into their new homes, or of displaced persons uprooted from theirs and looking 
for sanctuary and safety elsewhere, or those quarantined and locked down as visitors to countries when a 
pandemic hit, there are huge potential benefits for unlocking the value of the digital identity individuals 
carry in their pockets, regardless of the territory in which it was issued. 
Reconciling different domestic solutions may seem challenging but the practices collected in this paper 
show that there are existing patterns for meeting this need. In the European Union, the ambition for its 
citizens to have a digital identity for use across the Single Market is not based on a single, European 
identity, but a network of domestic approaches and domestic responsibility for identity data bound together 
in trust through the eIDAS regulation. On the other side of the world, Australia, New Zealand and Singapore 
are making progress on their own multi-lateral framework for trusted mutual recognition of digital identity, 
while Argentina, Costa Rica and Colombia have developed proofs of concept under the framework of the 
Latin American and Caribbean Council of Civil Registry, Identity and Vital Statistics. Moreover, in federal 
countries, such as the United States, the approach to digital identity nationally is reliant on a trust 
framework that recognises identities issued within sub-national jurisdictions. These national and domestic 
experiences point to an increasing consensus that technical and practical interoperability of digital identity 
mechanisms is an essential and achievable outcome. 

36 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
Argentina 
1. National context  
Argentina is a federal government and SID (Sistema de Identidad Digital) is the national solution for digital 
identity. SID reflects a public sector managed model that can be used for accessing both private and public 
sector services. 
In Argentina, digital identity is available from birth, which means that the total population of the country, 
which in 2021 was 46.8 million, is eligible for a digital identity.  
2. Current national Digital Identity management system  
The country model 
The digital identity model in Argentina relies on a biometric approach to validating identity using facial 
recognition and fingerprints based on the government’s own identity registration and the information held 
in the National Registry of People (Registro Nacional de las Personas, RENAPER).  
There is no distinction between access to public and private sector services uses this solution.  
All services can be accessed with physical identity: there is no service that is exclusively accessible through 
digital identity only. 
• 
The National Registry of People (RENAPER), which answers to the Ministry of Interior, is 
responsible for the identification of people in Argentina. The Ministry of Interior is the source of 
funding for digital identity in Argentina. 
• 
The Secretariat of Public Innovation (SIP) from the Chief of Cabinet of Minister´s Office is 
responsible for the design, proposal and coordination of administrative innovation and 
technological policies in different areas of government and both the central and decentralised 
contexts. SIP is also responsible for establishing the strategic direction and proposing regulation 
in this area, understanding digital government, and collaborating with the provinces and 
municipalities in their innovation processes.  
• 
The Undersecretariat of Administrative Innovation from the SIP has competencies to implement 
those initiatives related to document management, procedures, remote processing services and 
electronic authentication systems for people. Decree 1265/2016 established the Central Electronic 
Authentication Platform (PAEC) under the management of the Undersecretariat of Administrative 
Innovation. PAEC allows for remote procedures for natural persons and legal entities, as well as 
the coordination of interoperability and consolidation of identification systems, to achieve 
Annex: Collection of digital identity 
practices 

37 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
unambiguous identification and remote digital signature for physical and legal people, in 
coordination with the competent areas 
• 
The identification standards and technical protocols in Argentina rely on those set by bodies outside 
the country. For facial recognition Argentina uses the International Civil Aviation Organisation and 
for fingerprinting they follow the United States’ National Institute of Standards and Technology and 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
• 
RENAPER provides authentication services to the private sector. In order to be able to use identity 
verification services, private companies must sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with 
RENAPER requesting a specific type of service and committing to comply with the Data Protection 
Law. 
• 
The Argentinian government collaborates with providers of financial services, private security, and 
private health care as well as travel agencies and data brokers 
• 
In Argentina, the National Identity Document number (número de DNI) is used as a single National 
Identification Number across all services.  
• 
The initial sign-up for SID has to be done in person in order to capture the biometric data.  
Technical choices 
These biometric elements are sent to the APIs from the National Registry of People (RENAPER, for its 
Spanish acronym), who processes it and gives back a HIT or NO HIT answer, plus a score regarding the 
requirements made. It works 24/7. 
We work to add digital certificates to expand the identity verification options. In order to obtain and enrol 
the citizens’ biometric data, a government platform manages procedures regarding National Identity 
Documents (DNI, for its Spanish acronym) and Passports, administrating information from the physical 
office to the ABIS which manages the biometric elements ensuring unique identities for each citizen.  
The different means for authentication used in Argentina are e-signatures and two factor authentication 
(2FA) that requires access to biometric information whether facial recognition, voice printing, fingerprinting. 
Law 25.506 recognises electronic and digital signature. The Secretariat of Public Innovation is the authority 
responsible for the application of the normative regime which establishes the infrastructure for the digital 
signature stipulated in the Law. In addition to this, through the Undersecretariat of Administrative 
Innovation, the Secretariat of Public Innovation is involved in the regulatory framework of the regime related 
to the legal validity of a document and the digital signature and their addition to the circuit of information of 
the National Public Service and its paperless archive. Digital signature is used in applications and official 
systems of the National Public Service. Citizens can freely access digital certificates, and, more precisely, 
to the digital signature with a token device or to a remote digital signature solution through the Remote 
Digital Signature Platform (PDRF).  
98% of the population that has a digital identity uses the 2FA requiring access to biometric information. 
With 5 250 000 transactions carried out per month. The biometric elements are collected by RENAPER 
offices or each province´s civil registers. They are later processed in the AFIS and stored in the backend 
of RENAPER. The use of these elements is managed by RENAPER. 
Portable (cross-platform, cross-sectoral, cross-border) digital identity 
• 
Cross-platform: SID is not available through mobile devices. 
• 
Cross-sectoral: There is no distinction of use regarding the private or public sector. RENAPER 
provides authentication services to the private sector. In order to be able to use identity verification 
services, private companies must sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with RENAPER 
requesting a specific type of service and committing to comply with the Data Protection Law. Of all 

38 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
the possible non-public sector services (private sector and other providers of services) that could 
be using available digital identity solutions, between 25%-49% are doing so.  
• 
Cross-border: No foreign digital identity is recognised in Argentina and SID cannot be used 
elsewhere. However, proofs of concept have been developed under the framework of the Latin 
American and Caribbean Council of Civil Registry, Identity and Vital Statistics with Colombia and 
Costa Rica. 
Data visibility and citizen consents 
In Argentina, law 17671 provides citizens with the legal right to opt out of the use of a digital identity with 
all services alternatively being accessible via physical identification. 
Digital Identity systems fall within the scope of the Argentine data protection legislation to the extent that 
they involve personal data processing. Section 2 of Act No. 25.326 defines the term “personal data” as 
“Information of any kind relating to individuals or legal entities, determined or determinable”. Section 2 of 
Act No. 25.326 defines the term “data processing” as “Systematic operations and procedures, electronic 
or not, that allow the collection, conservation, arrangement, storage, modification, relation, evaluation, 
blocking, destruction, and in general the processing of personal data, as well as its transfer to third parties 
through communications, consultations, interconnections or transfers”.  
The most important regulations that comprise the Argentine data protection framework are as follows: 
• 
Section 43 of the National Constitution35  
• 
Act No. 25.326 on Personal Data Protection36 
• 
Decree No. 1558/200137 
• 
Act No. 27.483, which approves the ratification of the Convention for the Protection of Individuals 
regarding Automatic Processing of Personal Data of the Council of Europe (better known as 
"Convention 108")38 
The National Direction of Personal Data Protection, operating within Agency for Access to Public 
Information (AAIP) is the Argentinian authority that monitors and oversees the impact of Digital Identity on 
individual privacy and freedoms. The AAIP is a public body that acts as oversight authority at a national 
level for both Access to Information and Data Protection laws. It was created by Act No. 27.275 on Access 
to Public Information.  
Among other functions and powers granted to the AAIP in order to control the compliance with Act No. 
25.326, the Agency may request information from public and private entities regarding their data 
processing operations, impose administrative sanctions that may be applicable for violation of the 
provisions of Act No. 25.362, or request judicial authorization to access establishments, equipment, or data 
processing programs in order to verify violations of compliance with this law. Article 24 of Law 27275 
establishes that the AAIP has its own annual budget, while Article 25 establishes that the agency will have 
the technical and administrative staff established by the general budget law of the national administration. 
The Argentine data protection framework does not prohibit commercialization of data but sets out a series 
of mandatory rules that must be respected by data controllers/processors: 
                                                
35 http://servicios.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/0-4999/804/norma.htm  
36 http://servicios.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/60000-64999/64790/texact.htm  
37 http://servicios.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/70000-74999/70368/texact.htm  
38 http://servicios.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/315000-319999/318245/norma.htm  

39 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
• 
Pursuant to section 5 of Act No. 25.326, data controllers must request the data subject’s free, 
unambiguous, and informed consent prior to processing his/her personal data.  
• 
Section 11 of Act No. 25.326 establishes that controllers must require the data subject’s consent 
prior to transferring his/her data to another data controller/processor.  
• 
Section 4 of Law No. 25,326 sets forth rules on purpose limitation, proportionality, data 
minimization and data retention.  
• 
Section 6 of Law No. 25.326 establishes rules on transparency and information that must be 
provided to data subjects whenever his/her data is processed.  
• 
Data subjects have the right to request access, rectification, or erasure of their data from data 
controllers.  
• 
They also have the right to file a complaint before the AAIP or the competent Court (Section 43 of 
the National Constitution and sections 14, 15 and 16 of Law No. 25,326).  
• 
In technical terms, the consent is between private parties, the National Registry of people only 
exposes a backend that returns only HIT or no HIT. Access to the APIs is protected with signed 
tokens and centralized user administration by RENAPER.  
Data controllers and processors, whether private or public, have an obligation to adopt appropriate security 
measures in order to ensure security and confidentiality of the personal information they process (sections 
9 and 10 of Act No. 25,326). Furthermore, the AAIP issued Resolution No. 47/201839, which lists a series 
of recommendations that data controllers/processors should consider in order to comply with their security 
and confidentiality obligations. 
In technical terms, the data entered with the user's consent, that is, the image of their face or the images 
of their fingerprints, are taken from the API hosted in the cloud to the RENAPER backend where, once the 
identity verification has been carried out, they are eliminated, and only HIT or NO HIT is returned.  
Argentinian citizens are not proactively informed by authorities about any processing of their personally 
identifiable data. However, users of SID can access and see what attributes or data are being shared/re-
used, and with/by whom through the provisions of Article 11 of Law 25326 in the expectation their consent 
has been sought (and can be revoked): 
The personal data object of treatment can only be transferred for the fulfilment of the purposes directly 
related to the legitimate interest of the transferor and the assignee and with the prior consent of the owner 
of the data, who must be informed about the purpose of the transfer and identify the transferee or the 
elements that allow it to do so. The consent for the assignment is revocable. 
Civil society organisations are able to monitor the process by which a person's identifiable data is shared 
and reused:  
• 
Law No. 17.671 regulates citizen identification procedures.  
• 
Sections 5 and 7 of Law No. 25.326 establish the legal basis under which data controllers may 
process personal data. Among other legal basis, processing shall be lawful in the following 
scenarios:  
o 
When the data subject has given his consent to the processing of his/her personal data.  
o 
When processing is necessary for the performance of a contract.  
o 
When processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller is 
subject.  
o 
When processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest 
or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller.  
                                                
39 http://servicios.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/310000-314999/312662/norma.htm 

40 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
• 
Regarding proportionality, section 4 of Law No. 25.326 requires controllers to process only data 
that is adequate, relevant, and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which the data was 
obtained. It also establishes an obligation to destroy data when it is no longer necessary or relevant 
to the purposes for which it was collected.  
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity  
In December 2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, the number of individuals with a digital 
identity was 44 362 630. The percentage of the eligible population that had a digital identity was therefore 
94.7%. In April 2021, a year after the first wave of the pandemic, the total population with an active access 
to a digital identity was 44 503 167, meaning the share of eligible population with a digital identity had 
increased marginally to 95%.  
This reflects that a biometric approach to digital identity expects to incorporate 100% of society through 
their enrolment at birth. 
In Argentina it is not mandatory for public sector organisations to use SID for service user authentication 
and verification. Out of all public sector services where it would be necessary to authenticate users, 75-
99% were using it in 2021. In the private sector this figure is 25%-49%. 
Both public and private sector service teams which rely on SID are able to access technical support both 
at the point of integration and on an ongoing basis with support provided by a 24/7 help desk.   
The work regarding the digitalization of identity, that began in 2009, allowed, during the beginning of the 
pandemic, the remote access to financial servicesof millions of citizens that couldn´t circulate due to the 
restrictions and needed the state´s financial help.  
On the other hand, remote authentication and processing solutions were already implemented, and we 
worked to support the growth of authentication transactions on the Central Electronic Authentication 
Platform and to connect new client systems to the Platform. In 2020, the Platform and the service 
AUTENTICAR were integrated with 44 client applications, making a total of 123 the systems which make 
use of electronic authentication services.  
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
The Argentinian government is currently working on a project to implement an electronic DNI to store a 
digital identity certificate and an individual’s digital signature. 
Australia 
1. National context  
Australia is a federal government and the national solution for digital identity, operating under the brand 
myGov, reflects a federated model. Users are able to choose their preferred identity provider from a choice 
of public and private sector suppliers to prove their identity and allow them to access Australian public 
services. 
In Australia, all individuals above 15 years old can request a digital identity. The total population of the 
country in 2021 was 25.7 million, with the total population eligible for a digital identity (based on age) 19.9 
million, or 77% of the total population.   

41 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
2. Current national Digital Identity management system  
The country model 
Australia’s model for providing digital identity is not based on public sector identity materials through a 
public sector governed and delivered standalone digital identity solution. Instead, the myGov model in 
Australia consists of a federated approach where private sector and public sector managed digital identity 
providers offer their services to users who wish to have their identity verified. Currently, users can only 
access government services provided at both a federal and territorial level. 
• 
The strategic direction of and vision for the Australian Government’s Digital Identity system is 
steered by the Digital Transformation Agency in collaboration with Australian Government delivery 
partners and other system stakeholders. Policy direction is set by the Australian Government 
Minister for Employment, Workforce, Skills, Small and Family Business and Minister for 
Government Services. The delivery of the Australia Government’s Digital Identity system is 
overseen by the Digital Transformation Agency in collaboration with Australian Government 
delivery partners. 
• 
The Australian Government’s Digital Identity system is currently fully funded by the government, 
with a view to implementing a charging framework to address the long term sustainability of the 
system. 
• 
The Australian Government’s National Identity Proofing Guidelines (NIPGs) provide a robust, yet 
flexible risk based approach and set of guidelines to identity proofing and conducting identification, 
aligned with international best-practice standards. The NIPGs define four Identity Proofing (IP) 
levels, which can be applied through a risk-based assessment across individual interactions and 
identity requirements. The Trusted Digital Identity Framework (TDIF) also provides a framework 
for entities conducting roles as part of the Australian Government’s Digital Identity system, which 
itself references international standards. This framework aligns to the NIPGs where appropriate. 
• 
The Trusted Digital Identity Framework (TDIF) is an accreditation framework for the Australian 
Government Digital Identity system. It sets out the requirements that applicants need to meet to 
achieve accreditation. This includes identity providers and their ability to meet the identification 
requirements under the TDIF. Identity providers must be accredited under the TDIF to participate 
in the Australian Digital Identity system. Once accredited, providers need to continually 
demonstrate they meet their TDIF obligations by undergoing annual assessments. 
• 
The Australian government collaborates with non-public sector actors around digital identity, 
including mobile operators, IdP companies, bank and financial services, academia, and software 
companies. Non-public sector services are able to participate in the Australian Government Digital 
Identity system under the TDIF. They are also engaged in development of the TDIF and Digital 
Identity system. 
• 
People can obtain a Digital Identity in the Australian Government’s Digital Identity system through 
a simple, streamlined online-only process using the Australian Government’s identity provider, 
myGovID. The three-step process requires people to have a smart device and an email address, 
and be 15 years or older: 
1. Download the myGovID app (available on the Apple App Store and Google Play) 
2. Enter their details, including full name, date of birth and email address. After entering these 
details people have a Basic identity strength, with access to limited government online services. 
3. Verify their Australian identity documents, such as a passport, birth certificate, driver’s license 
or visa, which will be verified using the Australia Government’s Document Verification System. 
After verifying their identity documents people have a Standard identity strength which allows 
access to all participating government online services. 

42 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
• 
The Australian Government’s Digital Identity system is currently developing the capability for 
biometric verification to support a stronger identity strength. There is no National Identification 
Number used across all services, nor other mechanisms for connecting records between 
organisations.  
Technical choices 
The Australian Government’s Digital Identity system uses two-factor authentication that confirms access 
to a mobile device through the myGovID mobile application. The system is developing the capability for 
biometric verification to support a stronger identity strength. 
Portable (cross-platform, cross-sectoral, cross-border) digital identity 
• 
Cross-platform: The Australian Government’s Digital Identity system is available through Android 
and iOS based mobile devices via the myGovID app. Requests that require confirmation via 
myGovID are initiated within a browser and then secured using the app as a second factor for 
authentication 
• 
Cross-sectoral: In Australia myGov currently only supports public sector services 
• 
Cross-border: Australia is paying attention to global experiences in the design and delivery of 
digital identity and are exploring opportunities of mutually recognising Trust Frameworks with the 
governments of Singapore and New Zealand. Australia also leads the Digital Government 
Exchange (DGX) Digital Identity working group. The Digital Transformation Agency (DTA) has 
participated in ID4Good (Cybersecurity considerations and improving citizen experience with 
Digital identity) and the World Economic Forum (contributing to the paper on Identity in a Digital 
World: A new chapter in the social contract). We recognise that mutual recognition is a complex 
challenge that will take several years to complete. The Australian Government's Digital 
Transformation Agency is using a phased approach to mutual recognition, derived from the 
European Union’s Interoperability Framework and adapted from the World Bank’s Digital Identity 
Practitioners Guide. 
Data visibility and citizen consents 
The use of Digital Identity in Australia is voluntary for citizens, which also seeks to be strengthened by the 
proposed Trusted Digital Identity Legislation in development. 
There are multiple layers of privacy related rules applying to data entering the Australian Government’s 
Digital Identity system, including: 
• 
Commonwealth Privacy Act, the key federal legislation applying to data and privacy. Privacy 
protections are contained in 13 Australian Privacy Principles APPs), principles-based laws which 
can be interpreted and applied to the context of their organisations. The responsible agency is 
currently undertaking a review of the Act, so the rules in the Act could change in the future. 
• 
State based legislation, which governs how state entities handle personal information. Most state-
based legislations are similar to the Commonwealth Privacy Act and must be to be recognised for 
accreditation purposes under the TDIF. 
• 
The TDIF was developed to supplement existing Australian law and ensure that personal data 
entering the Australian Government Digital Identity system is subject to stringent privacy 
protections. 
• 
The TDIF contains a number of privacy specific rules, including rules which require accredited 
participants to conduct privacy impact assessment for high risk changes to their system, have 

43 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
privacy officers and privacy champions, only use behavioural information in certain ways, and seek 
explicit and informed consent before sharing an individual’s attributes with a relying party. 
The Australian Government is currently drafting new legislation to govern the Australian Government 
Digital Identity system. This legislation will contain a number of new, strong and in some cases novel 
privacy protections which will add new protections to data entering the system. The policy for these 
protections is still being consulted on, but will likely include areas like biometrics, profiling, and limits on 
the creation of unique identifiers. 
Accreditation under the Trusted Digital Identity Framework (TDIF) is open to the private sector. All 
organisations that are accredited as providers of Digital Identity and with roles under the TDIF in the 
Australian Government’s Digital Identity System must comply with the TDIF’s stringent privacy, fraud, and 
protective security requirements. To become a TDIF accredited provider, applicants are required to 
demonstrate how their Digital Identity service meets requirements for accessibility and usability, privacy 
protection, security and fraud control, risk management, technical integrity and more. This includes the 
need for: 
• 
an independent privacy impact assessment 
• 
an independent security assessment 
• 
ICT penetration test 
• 
Organisational policies and practices that demonstrate alignment with the Australian Government 
Protective Security Policy Framework, the Information Security Manual, the Australian Privacy 
Principles and the Privacy Code. 
The requirements defined in the framework build on the baseline of the Australian Cyber Security Centre’s 
Essential Eight cyber security mitigations. They also meet the requirements of organisations under the 
Privacy Act 1988 (Cth). Once accredited, providers need to continually demonstrate they meet their TDIF 
obligations by undergoing annual assessments. 
Users of the Australian Government’s Digital Identity system can access and view the attributes and data 
that are being shared with participants in the system through the use of their Digital Identity, they are also 
able to control their consents for the attributes and data that are being shared with participants in the 
system. The TDIF has requirements that disallow accredited providers (including private sector accredited 
providers) from disclosing a user’s data without their consent. It also has requirements that prevent 
organisations from using personal information for direct marketing purposes. These safeguards will be 
further strengthened in the Digital Identity legislation. 
The Australian Government’s Digital Identity system maintained strong security controls and privacy 
safeguards to protect user privacy throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. There have been no instances 
identified where the system has been unable to protect user privacy. 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity  
In Australia, it is not mandatory for the public sector to use the available digital identity solutions for service 
user authentication and verification. There are no available figures on the proportion of public services that 
require user authentication that use the available digital identity solution.  Non-government actors cannot 
currently integrate the Australian Government Digital Identity system into the services they provide to the 
public. 
In December 2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, the number of individuals with a digital 
identity was 128 000. The percentage of the eligible population that had a digital identity was therefore 
0.64%. In April 2021, a year after the first wave of the pandemic, the total population with an active access 
to a digital identity was 2.3 million, meaning the share of eligible population with a digital identity had 
increased roughly 11 percentage points to 11.35%.  

44 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
The Australian Government’s Digital Identity system provides a way for people to log in to myGov, the 
primary portal for individuals to access Australian Government digital services. myGov also provides 
access to people’s COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates, which supports Australia’s recovery from the 
COVID-19 pandemic and may become essential for reopening international borders. Strong authentication 
and verification methods like the Digital Identity system guard against fraud and ensures the person 
applying for the certificate is who they say they are. In the future, this could feasibly enable a strong, 
internationally recognised and interoperable COVID-19 Vaccination Certificate to support international 
travel through integration of a person’s Digital Identity and digital wallet.  
The Digital Identity system was used by most Australian businesses to access services and support during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. It was also integrated with the Australian Government’s primary individual portal, 
myGov, to support individuals to access government services and support. The Australian Government 
has also recognised that Digital Identity can also provide essential support in the case of natural disasters, 
demonstrated during the 2019-2020 Australian bushfires. Once a Digital Identity has been created, it 
removes the need to find identity documents such as birth certificates, passports which may have been 
lost, allowing for faster access to government services and relief payments. 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
The Australian government is working on rolling out a whole-of-economy Digital Identity system to include 
state, territory and local government, as well as the private sector. To this end, the Australian Government 
is currently developing legislation to: 
• 
allow for independent oversight of the system, by formalising the powers and governance 
arrangements of the independent Oversight Authority 
• 
enable the system to expand to state, territory and local governments and the private sector 
• 
ensure privacy protections and consumer safeguards to build trust in the system 
• 
Provide a legally enforceable set of rules that set the standards for participating in the Digital 
Identity system, including for accreditation. 
• 
Allow for entities to be accredited for their activities whether they are on or not on the system. 
The biggest lesson that the Australian government has learned throughout its digital identity reforms is to 
develop clear policy positions and trust frameworks to support the development and build of the system, 
and to develop these using already established best practice and standards where possible to optimise 
the opportunity for interoperability. Moreover, the importance of focusing on the benefits to the end users, 
the impacts of improved access to services, and the increase in productivity and fraud management to 
help build the case for change. 
Brazil 
1. National context  
The current national digital identity of Brazil is provided by the GOV.BR digital identity platform provided 
by the federal government. The digital identity solution makes use of biometric technology.  
In Brazil, individuals can have a digital identity from the age of 16. In 2021, the total population of Brazil 
was 213 million, with 170 million, or 80% of the total population, being eligible for a digital identity.  

45 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
2. Current national Digital Identity management system  
The country model 
Brazil has a shared digital identity management system model, where the management of the digital 
identity system is shared jointly by public and private sectors for accessing both private and public sector 
services. 
• 
The Ministry of Economy steers the strategic vision for and direction of digital identity while the 
Special Secretariat for Modernization of the State in General-Secretariat of the Presidency 
oversees its delivery.  
• 
The digital identity system is funded by the federal government budget.  
• 
In terms of standards for digital identity, the Steering Committee of the National Civil Identification 
have passed a number of legislative resolutions providing recommendations concerning biometric 
standards and the National Civil ID registry including: 
o 
Collect fingerprints of all hand fingers; 
o 
ANSI-INCITS 378/2004: common fingerprints minutiae for data exchange; 
o 
ICAO 9303: standard documentation used by the International Civil Aviation Organization, 
when it comes to facial biometrics; 
o 
ISO/IEC FCD 19794: setting common biometric exchange formats framework, such as 
ISO/UEC FCD 19794-2 and ISO/UEC FCD 19794-4 (common fingerprints formats frameworks 
- padrões de impressão digital) ISO/IEC FCD 19794-5 (common facial image formats 
framework - padrões de imagem facial); 
o 
ANSIINIST ITL 1-2000 e ANSI/NIST ITL 2-2008 - common data standards format framework 
for digital data exchange; 
o 
WSQ Versão 3.1: common compression and image storage algorithm of fingerprints; 
o 
CBEFF (common biometric exchange formats framework) : padrão de intercâmbio de dados 
biométricos. 
• 
The Brazilian government collaborates with banks and financial services, as well as academia 
around digital identity. Brazil’s digital identity system is integrated with the authentication platforms 
of large banks. 
• 
The development of a national digital identity system in Brazil has been supported by Law nº 
13.444/2017 that introduced the National Civil Registration - Identificação Civil Nacional - ICN, 
which aims at providing proof of legal identity to Brazilians when accessing public services as well 
as in their relations with the private sector. The above-mentioned legislation also created the 
Steering Committee of the National Civil Identification - Comitê Gestor da Identificação Civil 
Nacional -, which is composed by members of the three branches of the Public Administration. The 
Superior Electoral Court and the Federal Executive branch take turns as the head of the Committee 
every two years. The Committee’s decisions require a majority of two-thirds to be put into force. 
The Committee can recommend biometric standards, as well as participate in the formation rule 
for the National ID number. It can also set guidelines for the administration of the National Civil 
Identification Fund - Fundo da Identificação Civil Nacional (FICN) and for resources management. 
Moreover, the Committee provides guidance to the implementation of interoperability between the 
electronic systems of the Federal Executive Branch and the Electoral Justice. 
• 
Brazil does not have a national identification number across all services. Instead, the number of 
CPF (a federal tax ID), managed by the Special Department of Federal Revenue of Brazil is used 
for connecting records between organisations or services. The tax number - Cadastro de Pessoas 
Físicas (CPF) – forms the basis of the number of the National Civil Identification - Identificação 
Civil Nacional (ICN) -, for daily and “public use”. There is an internally restricted number for the 

46 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
ICN in order to assure uniqueness. This restricted number will be linked to an individual biometric 
registration and a single tax number as well 
• 
Citizens can use different methods to complete the on boarding online in order to get a digital 
identity. Citizens can complete the on boarding process through the website address acesso.gov.br 
and have the support using the app (Meu gov.br) which is available at Google play and Apple 
Store. All of them require the citizen to have their CPF, which is a sufficient condition to access any 
public service in Brazil. The steps to obtain a digital identity are: 
o 
Bronze Category - Classificação Bronze 
‒ 
Based on Knowledge-based Authentication (KBA), citizens must answer questions related 
to personal data, as well as their labour and pension records. 
o 
Silver Category - Classificação Prata 
‒ 
Based on banking authentication, bank customers can, by means of bank digital identity 
login, identify themselves at GOV.BR Identity platform 
‒ 
Based on facial biometrics saved in the driver 's license database, using mobile phone 
cameras.  
o 
Gold Category - Classificação Ouro 
‒ 
Based on facial biometrics stored in the National Civil Identification (ICN) dataset, using 
the mobile phone cameras. Currently, the database holds biometric data for 118 million 
Brazilians. 
Technical choices 
In Brazil, the means for authentication used via the digital identity include digital certificate file, username 
and password, and two-factor authentication that requires access to a mobile device. Facial biometrics are 
also gathered and used. 
• 
Digital certificates are considered especially valuable for the private sector organisations who 
access government services from the Brazilian Federal Revenue Office. Per month, 300 000 
authentications/verification are issued via digital certificates by any available digital identity 
solution. 
• 
Username and password are currently providing access to more than a thousand digital public 
services. Per month, 140 million authentication/verifications are issued by any available digital 
identity solution.  
• 
Per month, 350 000 authentication/verifications are issued using two-factor authentication that 
confirms access to a mobile device.  
• 
There is no figure available on the number of authentications/verifications issued that requires 
access to biometric information.  
Portable (cross-platform, cross-sectoral, cross-border) digital identity 
• 
Cross-platform: The national digital identity solution in Brazil can be accessed from mobile 
devices which allow for cross-platform portability.  
• 
Cross-sectoral: The available digital identity solutions in Brazil can be used both by businesses 
and citizens to access public services. The digital identity solution for GOV.br is integrated with the 
bank authentication platform, which implies there is cross-sectoral portability for the bank 
authentication platform solution. The public sector managed digital identity solution cannot be used 
for accessing non-government services.  

47 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
• 
Cross-border: Digital identities from other countries are currently not recognised for authentication 
and verification in Brazil, and neither is the digital identity of Brazil recognised by other countries 
for user authentication and verification.  
Data visibility and citizen consents 
In Brazil, citizens have a legal right to opt out of the use of a digital identity.  
Brazil’s General Data Protection Law (LGPD) is the law which provides regulations for the processing of 
personal data either by individuals or by organisations (government or private sector).  
The Law creates the National Council for the Protection of Personal Data and Privacy, which will be 
composed of 23 representatives from the government, parliament, judiciary, productive sectors and civil 
society. This council is to propose strategic guidelines, preparing annual evaluation reports, suggesting 
actions to be taken, preparing studies and holding debates and public hearings on the protection of 
personal data and privacy. 
The National Data Protection Authority (ANPD) is part of the Brazilian federal government and linked to 
the Presidency of Brazil. Although the office of Presidency of Brazil is responsible for the budgets, from a 
technical and subject matter perspective, ANPD is an independent entity that has competences related to 
evaluate and address data protection issues. This legal nature is transitory and ANPD may be transformed 
into an independent federal public administration entity within two years from the date of entry into force of 
the ANPD regimental structure. The mandate of ANPD includes: 
• 
Exclusively oversee and impose administrative sanctions when LGPD is violated; 
• 
The promotion of data protection and privacy within the Brazilian society; 
• 
Request information regarding the processing of personal data from data processors and 
controllers; 
• 
Promote cooperation with DPAs from other countries; 
• 
Interpret LGPD 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity  
In Brazil, it is mandatory for public sector organisations to use available digital identity solutions for service 
user authentication and verification. The budget and technical development for digital identity are 
centralized within The Secretariat of Digital Government of the Ministry of Economy (SGD), which offers a 
technical team to support public agencies in implementing the digital identity solutions. As of today, 50%-
74% of public services where it is necessary to authenticate users are using the available digital identity 
solutions for service user authentication/verification. On average, individuals use the available digital 
identity solution to access any public service fifteen times per year.  
In December 2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, the number of individuals with a digital 
identity was 45 million. The percentage of the eligible population that had a digital identity was therefore 
26%. In April 2021, a year after the first wave of the pandemic, the total population with an active digital 
identity was 97 million, meaning digital identity adoption had increased by 116% to 57%. This figure has 
gone on to increase to 105 million by June 2021. 
• 
The pandemic saw increased demand not only for digital identity but also access to GOV.BR, the 
government website with an increase from 54 million in March 2020 to 140 million in May 2021, 
equivalent to a 159% growth.  
• 
Digital identity is required for accessing a list of more than 3 thousand digital public services through 
GOV.BR, which is the main reason for visiting the webpage. Some of the digital public services are 
provided by the Federal government, while others are delivered at the local level - municipalities 

48 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
and states. Throughout the pandemic the number of services connected to the platform have more 
than doubled.  
• 
Proof-of-life is one example of a digital service available at GOV.BR Portal. More than 7 million 
pensioners and retirees that received social security benefits can now update their status and prove 
they are alive and still eligible for the benefit using mobile and facial recognition technology – this 
has contributed to public trust and has enhanced the public’s acceptance of digitalisation. It has 
also prevented citizens from going to government venues in order to access the service, avoiding 
unnecessary social contact during the pandemic. 
• 
The delivery of cash benefits from the government online was one of the services that benefitted 
the most from digital identity use during the pandemic. This include access to an emergency 
program for maintaining jobs and income, and social benefits paid by the Social Security National 
Institute to pensioners and retirees who needed to prove they are alive in order to maintain benefits. 
In terms of protecting user privacy, digital services that use identifiable data from the digital identity 
solution provided by the federal government are subject, by default, to information security and 
privacy protection standards that also helped mitigate risks of data misuse during the pandemic. 
The unified digital identity solution is already used today in 39% of the digital services of the federal 
government and over 3.000 digital services in states and municipalities. 
• 
The most important lessons from the use of digital identity during the COVID-19 crisis includes 
understanding that the use and adoption of a digital identity solution by the population is related to 
user experience - efforts made to understand user needs, their difficulties and barriers to use, and 
develop rapid and constant improvements. If user experience is not considered, the users will use 
shortcuts to pass by the problem which may increase security risks.  
• 
Furthermore, Brazil finds it important to aggregate the existing digital identity solutions to the digital 
identity platform as an on boarding strategy. In Brazil, it was critical to allow for the use of the 
existing, secure digital identity solutions already for the financial ecosystem, government official 
biometrics information, and digital certificate ecosystem in order to facilitate on boarding and 
promote adoption.  
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
In recent years, an important set of laws have been put in force in Brazil aiming at fostering the use of 
digital identity: 
• 
Law 13444/2017, which, introduced the National Civil Identification - ICN. The ICN aims at 
providing proof of legal identity to Brazilians when they access public services as well as when 
interacting with the private sector 
• 
Law 14063/2020: Provides for the use of electronic signatures in citizen-government interactions. 
It is regulated by Decree 10543/2020, which sets the requirements for electronic signatures. Digital 
identity enables the use of electronic signature. 
• 
Law 14129: Sets principles, rules and instruments for Digital Government. It also states that the 
tax number is both sufficient as a proof of legal identity for citizens and provides access to other 
identification documents.  
In terms of the most valuable lessons learned through the reforms for the Brazilian government reports 
“one citizen, one identity and authentication solution for all digital government services”. By offering a single 
cross-platform identity centrally that meets the diverse security and multi-level authentication needs of all 
digital services, it will result in rapid growth in population adoption. Aggregating the existing solutions in a 
single platform that gives citizens the feeling of a single cohesive solution is the most appropriate strategy 
to evolve in the implementation of the solution according to Brazil.  

49 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
Democratic Republic of Congo 
There is currently no national digital identity management system in place in the Democratic Republic of 
Congo. The existing identification system and related standards are based on the electoral card, which is 
funded by the Electoral Commission. The Digital Ministry is responsible for setting a strategic vision for 
digital identity in the country. The Democratic Republic of Congo does not have a legislation in place to 
protect a person's data connected to the use of a Digital Identity system. 
European Union 
The European Union provides legislation concerning the functioning of digital identity in all EU Member 
States and EEA countries. The electronic IDentification, Authentication and trust Services (eIDAS) 
regulation entered into force in 2014 and oversees electronic identification and trust services for electronic 
transactions in the European Union's internal market. It regulates electronic signatures, electronic 
transactions, involved bodies, and their embedding processes to provide a safe way for users to conduct 
business online like electronic funds transfer or transactions with public services. eIDAS ensures mutual 
recognition of the eID for authentication among member states in order to achieve the goal of the Digital 
Single Market. Building on the lessons and experiences of this regulation, the European Commission put 
forward proposals on 3 June 2021 for a European Digital Identity framework. 
In addition to EU level efforts on digital identity, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) provides 
a cross-European model for data protection and individual consents that are highly relevant in the digital 
identity conversation and cited by the other European Union member countries in their responses. 
Furthermore, GDPR has provided an international model with other countries seeking to ensure 
equivalency with their domestic models in this area. 
Germany 
1. National context  
The current national digital identity of Germany is the eID infrastructure provided by the federal 
government. The identity solution is provided through a chip which is included in three different types of 
cards: the German citizen identity card, the electronic residence permit for non-citizens of the EU/EEA 
area, and the eID card for citizens within the EU or EEA area.  
In Germany, individuals aged 16 or above can have the eID. Germany’s total population in 2021 was 83.2 
million, and the total eligible population for eID based on age was therefore 62.3 million, or 75% of the total 
population.  
2. Current national Digital Identity management system  
The country model 
Germany’s model for providing digital identity is sector specific with reusable public digital identity. This 
means that there are private sector managed digital identity solutions for accessing only private sector 
services, and public sector managed identity solutions for accessing both public and private sector 
services. 
• 
The German Federal Ministry of the Interior, Building and Community is responsible for identity 
management as well as passport and ID systems in Germany and the project Digital Identities of 
the Federal Government. The Federal Office for Information Security (BSI) carries out the 

50 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
certification in accordance with the Technical Directive TR-03128-2 of the BSI, which identification 
service providers must comply with in accordance with Section 21 b of the Act on Identity Cards 
and Electronic Identification. 
• 
The issuing authority for authorisation certificates (VfB) in the Federal Office of Administration 
(BVA) grants service providers the state authorisation to read out the identification data from the 
national online ID when fulfilling the requirements. On behalf of the Federal Ministry of the Interior, 
Building and Community, the Bundesdruckerei GmbH produces the three online identifiers, which 
are equipped with the state and certified according to the eIDAS regulation at the highest level of 
trust. The Bundesdruckerei GmbH is partly state-financed GmbH under the supervision of the 
Federal Ministry of Finance as investment leader. 
• 
The issuance of the German identity card, the electronic residence permit and the eID card for EU 
and EEA citizens are charged with fees, which are partially received by Bundesdruckerei GmbH. 
In addition, there are other private sector identity providers not notified under the eIDAS regulation, 
which finance themselves privately. 
• 
The EU’s eIDAS regulation is implemented in Germany’s administration. The requirements for 
levels of assurance arising from the eIDAS regulation are specified more precisely in Germany by 
the technical directive of the Federal Office for Information Security (BSI), BSI-TR03107. There are 
three levels of assurance: high, medium, and normal for identification with administrative services. 
Identification for private sector offers is partly regulated by domestic laws, such as the 
Telecommunications Act (TKG) and the Money Laundering Act (GWG).  
• 
The Federal Office for Information Security (BSI) is responsible for the certification of eID products 
(eID servers, eID clients) and eID applications based on the corresponding technical guidelines 
(TR) of the BSI. The certification of their eID products and eID applications according to the national 
BSI-TR is open to German and international companies as well as state institutions. 
• 
As part of the Digital Identities project, the Federal Government is currently working with private 
sector actors to design an open identity ecosystem based on an SSI wallet. As part of the Digital 
Identities project, the Federal Government is working with companies from the mobility, banking, 
hotel, e-commerce and telecommunications sectors. As the future Smart-eID may be be used 
alongside an eSIM, mobile network operator will increasingly be important as providers of that 
eSIM. 
• 
In Germany there is currently no single national identification number used across services nor a 
mechanism connecting records between different organisations or services. The identification 
number is instead provided and used after a successful identification (e.g. in a user account based 
on the eID function) to clearly assign data to a natural person in an administrative process. The 
identification number itself is therefore not treated as an electronic proof of identity. In the future, a 
so-called identification number will be introduced.  
• 
There is currently no online-only process for users to obtain an eID in Germany. In order to obtain 
the online ID function, a personal application for one of the three identity cards – the German 
identity card, the electronic residence permit and the eID card for citizens of the EU and the EEA 
– is necessary with the respective competent authority. This requires certain evidence and 
identification by the public authority on the basis of a national identity card. After production of the 
ID card and before picking up the ID card in the local authority, the applicant receives a PIN letter. 
This provides important information for the activation and blocking of the online ID function. After 
picking up the ID card and setting the self-selected, six-digit PIN for the online ID function, the 
person can use their digital identity. As a response to lessons learnt during the COVID-19 
pandemic and the limitations on activating identities, the Federal Government will implement a 
partial digital process for the subsequent activation of the online ID function as well as for the 
subsequent online application for a new PIN. 

51 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
• 
The eID infrastructure for the online ID function is provided by the federal government. For the 
electronic proof of identity, the online ID function is provided in a chip. The chip can be read by the 
service providers for which the electronic identity verification is required, if the service provider (the 
authority or company) has been granted the State’s authorisation. The service provider uses an 
eID reader connected to the web application.  
Technical choices 
The German digital identity is accessed through a chip on a smartcard using a card reader. The service 
provider needs software or an eID client in order to establish the connection between the eID server and 
the chip card. Users install an eID client on their smartphone or computer which establishes the end-to-
end encrypted internet connection between the chip card and the eID server via NFC-enabled 
smartphones or a card reader. 
Bundesdruckerei GmbH supports federal authorities that want to establish their own eID infrastructure for 
electronic identification with the online ID function, by providing a central eID service, the required 
authorisation certificates and SSL/TLS certificates as well as technical integration into existing IT systems. 
eID-service providers support the establishment of their own eID infrastructure and identification service 
providers take over identification for the Authority as a service. Authorities wishing to connect their services 
to the user accounts of the Federal Government and the federal states receive support from the competent 
authorities of the Federal Government (BMI, DV 3) and the 16 federal states.  
Portable (cross-platform, cross-sectoral, cross-border) digital identity 
• 
Cross-platform: Since 2017 it has been possible for the three German identity cards (the identity 
card, electronic residence permit or eID card for EU citizens) to operate with mobile devices that 
are Near-Field Communication (NFC) compatible. The Digital Identities project is currently 
developing a replacement solution that will work without creating the ID card. In the future, Smart-
eID will store the identity data from the smart card in a security element or in an eSIM on your 
smartphone. The Smart-eID can then be used for identification on the Internet without using the ID 
card. In future, the Smart-eID can also be used in conjunction with an eSIM. Mobile network 
operators will increasingly be important in providing the eSIM. 
• 
Cross-sectoral: It is possible for non-public organisations, including the private sector, to develop 
and offer services that use the national online ID.  
• 
Cross-border: Pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 on electronic identification and trust 
services for electronic transactions in the internal market and repealing Directive 1999/93/EC, or 
eIDAS regulation, notified eIDs of the European Member States are accepted in Germany. 
Germany implements the eIDAS regulation. However, not all federal levels are at the same level 
in implementation. The following list applies to the eIDAS compliant national user account 
„Nutzerkonto Bund“: Belgium, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Italy, Latvia, Malta, Netherlands, 
Portugal, Slovakia and Spain. The EU’s eIDAS regulation is implemented in Germany’s 
administration. The requirements for levels of assurance arising from the eIDAS regulation are 
specified more precisely in Germany by the technical directive of the Federal Office for Information 
Security (BSI), BSI-TR03107. There are three levels of assurance: high, medium, and normal for 
identification with administrative services.  
Data visibility and citizen consents 
In Germany, citizens have a legal right to opt out of the use of a digital identity.  

52 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
When using the online ID function, after the connection between the ID card and the smartphone or the 
card reader has been established, the user receives information about which provider requests the data 
and what data is specifically involved. 
Before transferring data from the digital identity, the data is displayed to the user, and it is free to the user 
to decide about the transfer of the data. He or she can also refuse to do so. The use of the state eID 
function is free of charge for users and service providers. The issuing authority for authorisation certificates 
(VfB) in the Federal Office of Administration (BVA) grants service providers the state authorisation to read 
out the identification data from the national online ID when fulfilling the requirements. 
The applicable data protection requirements must be complied with, including GDPR and the Federal Data 
Protection Act. In addition, the user must agree to the transmission of data by entering the self-selected, 
six-digit PIN. If the user does not enter the PIN, the data will not be transmitted. If the data has been 
transmitted after PIN input, the transaction cannot be revoked. 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity  
In December 2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, the number of individuals with a digital 
identity in Germany was 30.3 million. The percentage of the eligible population that had a digital identity 
was therefore 49%. In April 2021, a year after the first wave of the pandemic, the total population with an 
active access to a digital identity was 38.3 million, meaning digital identity adoption had increased 26% to 
61%. On average individuals use a digital identity solution to access or consume any public sector service 
3.2 times per year. 
• 
In Germany, as per § 2 (3) of the EGovernment Act of the Federal Government (EGovG), it is 
mandatory for all federal authorities to offer an electronic proof of identity in administrative 
proceedings in which they have to establish the identity of a person on the basis of a legal act or 
for other reasons. This obligation applies to the public administration activities of the federal 
authorities, including federal direct corporations, institutions and foundations under public law. 
According to § 3a of the E-Government Act, the online ID function of the ID card in conjunction with 
an electronic form, is permitted to replace the written form in federal law. 
• 
In Germany, authorities at all federal levels can entrust eID service providers to support them in 
setting up their own eID infrastructure, or to entrust identification service providers with the 
identification of customers. However, it is easier for them to adopt the user accounts offered by the 
Federal Government and the federal states on their administrative portals. On the Internet portal 
www.personalausweisportal.de, the Federal Ministry of the Interior, Building and Community 
provides information for authorities that describe how the online identification function can be 
integrated into processes. This also includes technical information as well as contact details of eID 
service providers and identification service providers.  
• 
During the COVID-19 crisis the federal government was able to quickly provide administrative 
services using digital identity. One example is the financial aid for companies (immediate aid, 
Corona bridging aids), which could be applied for on a platform provided by the federal government 
with the use of the citizens' online ID. In this way, companies could also apply for and receive 
financial assistance during the lockdown periods. In Germany, the COVID-19-related restrictions 
have led temporarily to a complete closure of citizens’ offices. This in general has shown the need 
for a trusted mobile solution. As a more specific result, the existing online ID function could not be 
activated locally in the Citizens’ Office and consequently citizens could not use important 
administrative services digitally. For this reason, the Federal Government will implement in 2021 a 
partial digital process for the subsequent activation of the online ID function as well as for 
subsequent online application for a new PIN. 
• 
Most eID transactions are accounted for by the eServices of pension insurance in the case of 
official benefits. With their online ID, citizens can access their pension account within seconds – 

53 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
this can be a great help, for example, in financing talks with banks. Regarding the private sector 
offers, the unlocking of newly acquired SIM cards or eSIM by mobile operators with the online 
identification is a frequently used application. It works much faster than video-ident and the SIM 
card or eSIM can be used immediately. During the Covid 19 pandemic, grid capacity was not 
sufficient, especially at the beginning of the first lockdown. Video-ident-procedures therefore often 
failed or were interrupted and had to be restarted. With the online ID, however, the identifications 
could usually be performed without interference. 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
The Federal Government is currently implementing the Digital Identities project. The aims of the project 
are the development and introduction of electronic identification with the smartphone (Smart-eID) and the 
creation of a basis for a national and European "self-sovereign identity ecosystem“.  
Germany is aiming for an SSI-based identity ecosystem that is EU-compatible and open to both 
government applications and private sector applications. The national online identity function fulfils the 
level of assurance high according to the eIDAS regulation and thus forms the ideal basis for any SSI-based 
identity ecosystem. Additional attributes that are not included in it must be verified by other locations and 
can thus be used to enrich the digital identity.  
As part of the Digital Identities project, the Federal Government is currently working with private sector 
actors to design an open identity ecosystem based on an SSI wallet. This interdepartmental initiative with 
the participation of the Federal Chancellery is working on 8 use cases with companies from the mobility, 
banking, hotel, e-commerce and telecommunications sectors to demonstrate the potential of an SSI-based 
eID ecosystem before the end of 2021.  
A second initiative involves the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy and is called "Secure 
Digital Identities" (2021-2024), in which technical solutions, predominantly SSI, will be tested, harmonized 
and prepared for rollout in four large-scale showcase projects together with citizens, municipalities and 
SMEs. 
The early involvement of all relevant stakeholders in the public sector and the private sector is of great 
importance for the success of the introduction of a national offer for electronic identification. The public 
needs to be informed at an early stage of the new possibilities and offer user-friendly, attractive use cases, 
especially in the area of economic applications, before the public offer is widely promoted. 
Italy 
1. National context  
Digital identity in Italy relies on a combination of three separate solutions. The Public Digital Identity System 
(SPID) is the single digital identity used for identity verification in Italy and works in conjunction with the 
Electronic Identity Card (CIE). In addition, Italians can use the National Services Card (CNS). Although the 
CNS is not approved and recognised under the EU eIDAS Regulation, it plays an important role in allowing 
citizens and professionals to have access to digital services.  
In Italy, all individuals above 18 years old can request a digital identity. The total population of the country 
in 2021 was 59.6 million, with the total population eligible for a digital identity (based on age) 50.2 million, 
or 84% of the total population.   

54 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
2. Current national Digital Identity management system  
The country model 
• 
The Italian Ministry of Innovation and Digital Transition (MITD) is in charge of steering the strategic 
direction, coordination, evaluation, and implementation of policies and programs in a wide range 
of policy areas relative to innovation and digitalisation, including digital identity. The Agency for 
Digital Italy (AgID) is the regulatory body responsible for overseeing the delivery of SPID and 
identity providers while the Ministry of the Interior is in charge of delivering the CIE.  
• 
For the funding of SPID, Identity Providers (IdP) fund themselves by selling SPID to relaying parties 
(RP) such as private service providers or other related services, like signature services and 
professional versions of digital identity. The IdP make a profit only with private service providers. 
For CIE, users pay approximately EUR 24 to get their identity card and a fraction of this fee is used 
to sustain services provided by the Ministry of the Interior.  
• 
The identification standards and technical protocols for SPID and CIE both comply with the EU 
eIDAS Implementing Regulation. The Government assesses and certifies the quality of private 
identity providers for SPID through an accreditation process carried out by AgID. The legal basis 
for the assessment carried out by AgID is art. 64 of the Law Decree 285/2014 and art. 64.2of the 
Code of Digital Administration (CAD). In particular, art. 4 of the Law Decree 285/2014 entrusts 
AgID with managing the assessment and accreditation process of private IdPs. The accreditation 
takes the form of a bilateral agreement between AgID and the IdP. AgID (art. 6 of the bilateral 
agreements) carries out oversight tasks and periodical reviews of each IdP (e.g. compliance with 
the standards, quality of the service etc.). AgID can also carry out random testing to continuously 
assess the compliance and quality of the services of the certified IdPs. 
• 
In its current digital identity system, the Italian government collaborates with the private sector 
mainly in the form of private IdPs. Currently, eight out of the nine IdPs in Italy are private 
companies. In addition, the government collaborates with banks and financial services providers 
and software companies. Finally, private companies can use both SPID and CIE as service 
providers. 
• 
In Italy, the Tax Identification Number is used as a single National Identification Number across all 
services. It is issued to every Italian citizen at their birth. Every foreign resident or worker also 
receives a 'Fiscal Code' upon registering with the Italian public authorities. 
• 
Citizens can request access to a digital identity (SPID) through an online-only process. The 
procedure requires them to provide a valid identity document, the national number (Fiscal Code), 
a personal mobile number, and an email address. The user can then choose between the IdPs and 
complete the procedure through their websites. The online-only process is available for most of the 
IdPs. Depending on the IdP the user applying for SPID is identified via either a) webcam either in 
a call with a IdP operator or via a video/photo taken to prove his/her identity; or b) online 
identification with CIE or electronic passport, following the identification procedures through the 
mobile app of the IdP.  
• 
SPID acts as the single digital identity, which is provided by different IdPs. It allows users to log 
into different organisations and provides an exchange for identity transactions. SPID is mandatory 
for authentication for government agencies/departments and optional for the private sector.  
• 
CIE is a smart card that works both as a personal identification document that certifies the identity 
of the holder, and as a means of authentication for online public and private service providers. The 
use of CIE is based on the cryptographic services installed on the card itself, and the interaction 
with the user device based on NFC. By law, CIE is progressively replacing the paper Identity card.  
• 
CNS is a smart card or a USB key containing a 'digital certificate'. CNS is issued by the Italian 
Revenue Agency or alternatively by a Chamber of Commerce. CNS allows users to prove their 

55 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
identity online and to access digital public services (e.g. digital health services and financial 
services). In addition, the CNS issued by the Chamber of Commerce allows businesses to sign 
digital documents (financial statements, bills, contracts etc.) and to access digital public services 
for businesses. 
Technical choices 
The different means for authentication used in Italy include smartcards; digital certificate files; e-signatures; 
username and password; and two factor authentication (2FA) that confirms access to email account, 
mobile phone number, or mobile device.  
Authentication via SPID is designed around three security levels: 
1. Username and password: the first level allows the user to access online services through a 
username and a password chosen by the user. 
2. 2FA: together with the password, the user will be requested to access through a temporary 
one-time password (OTP) that will be sent to the user's phone number (SMS) or mobile device 
(application provided by IdP).  
3. 3FA: username and password plus physical device that handles cryptographic keys (e.g. smart 
card) 
Italy considers username and password useful for increasing the user-friendliness of digital public services, 
especially for people with basic digital skills. The single-step authentication constitutes an immediate and 
intuitive means to access remotely digital public services. Furthermore, it might be particularly adequate 
and useful for 'low-risk' and 'low-impact' scenarios where improper use of digital identity services would 
result in a negligible damage to the citizen or the business.  
1.5% of the population that has a digital identity uses a smartcard to authenticate themselves and per 
month, 2 million authentications are issued using a smart card. According to Italy, smartcards are especially 
useful for those who own an NFC mobile phone.  
2FA is considered particularly valuable for accessing the services of public administrations. Most public 
services require 2FA in order for the user to access them. The heightened level of control responds to the 
need of providing certainty on the identity of the user and minimizing risks when sensitive personal 
information is being accessed. 2FA confirming access to a mobile phone number responds to Italy's 
strategy of moving towards an increasingly mobile digital government that values the portability and 
availability on mobile devices of digital identities. As the majority of access to digital identity (SPID) takes 
place through smartphones, linking the 2FA to a mobile phone number increases the usability and user-
centricity of the service as it allows the user to complete the operation through a single device. 
Portable (cross-platform, cross-sectoral, cross-border) digital identity 
• 
Cross-platform: As described above, SPID and CIE are available through smartphones and other 
mobile devices. Italy is expected to establish closer collaboration with Mobile Network Operators 
when developing a mobile digital identity. 
• 
Cross-sectoral: In Italy, a non-public sector organisation (including the private sector) can develop 
and provide a service that relies entirely on available digital identity solutions to function. Of all the 
possible non-public sector services (private sector and other providers of services) that could be 
using available digital identity solutions, between 1-24% are doing so. The remaining services are 
using identification through personal credentials via a website or mobile app (e.g. personal number 
and/or two-step-identification are required to access most of the online banking services), or in-
person identification through paper documents. AgID supports the SPID implementation process.  

56 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
• 
Cross-border: The Italian eIDAS-Node enables the cross-border interoperability of digital identity 
(eID) systems and the circularity of eIDs in EU member states. In 2021, in practice, digital identities 
from 23 EU/EEA member states could be used to log in to public and private digital services in 
Italy: Portugal, Finland, Croatia, Austria, Denmark, United Kingdom, Luxembourg, Latvia, Slovenia, 
Netherlands, Slovakia, Czechia, Ireland, Lithuania, Malta, Spain, Estonia, Sweden, Greece, 
Cyprus, Germany, Belgium, and Norway. Within the EU acquis, the Proposal for a Regulation 
amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 as regards establishing a framework for a European 
Digital Identity (COM(2021) 281 final) put forward by the European Commission on 3 June 2021, 
is expected to provide further guidance to the development of digital identities at both the Member 
State and Union-wide level. 
Data visibility and citizen consents 
In Italy, citizens have a legal right to opt out of the use of a digital identity.  
The European Regulation (EU) 2016/679 ('GDPR') provides the legislative framework applicable to 
personal data connected to the use of the digital identity system. The Italian Data Protection Authority 
(DPA) oversees the digital identity system compliance with national and European legislation. DPA is an 
independent administrative authority established by the so-called privacy law (Law No. 675 of 31 
December 1996) and regulated subsequently by the Personal Data Protection Code (Legislative Decree 
No. 196 of 30 June 2003) as amended by Legislative Decree No. 101 of 10 August 2018, which also 
established the Italian DPA as the supervisory authority responsible for monitoring application of the 
General Data Protection Regulation (pursuant to Article 51 of Regulation No. 2016/679). DPA is funded 
with approximately EUR 32 million annually and is staffed with over 320 employees from different 
backgrounds.  
On the SPID website, users are provided with information about the processing of their personal identifiable 
data from using the digital identity. The user can read about how SPID will use its personal data, how long 
personal data will be retained, and on the meaning of the relevant legal terms (e.g. consent is defined as 
the expression of a user's will and it has to be free, specific, informed and unambiguous through which the 
user expresses its consent to the use, re-use, and sharing of data).The users are informed that all 
expressions of consent can be revoked at any time. The revoke of one's consent does not affect the 
lawfulness of data use before the consent was revoked.  
Personal data through SPID are handled by AgID. In delivering the relevant services, AgID handles data 
together with a number of responsible data handlers. AgID does not transfer personal data to third parties, 
third countries, or international organisations. To ensure the security of user data in private sector digital 
identity solutions, AgID oversees and has sanctioning power. The Operator ('Gestore') is legally bound 
through a contract concluded with AgID to continuously monitor, following criteria of necessity and 
proportionality, how data is being used "in order to detect and tackle potential violation, duplication, and 
any other abuse of each user's digital identity credentials" 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity  
In Italy, it is mandatory for public sector organisations to use SPID for service user authentication and 
verification, while it is optional for the private sector. Art. 64 of the Digital Administration Code provides 
that all government services should replace any previous authentication models with SPID, with the 
exception of CIE. The SPID implementation process is assisted and supported by AgID. Out of all public 
sector services where it would be necessary to authenticate users, 50-74% were using it in 2021. On 
average, individuals use a digital identity to access or consume public services 24 times per year.  
In December 2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, the number of individuals with a digital 
identity was 5.5 million. The percentage of the eligible population that had a digital identity was therefore 

57 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
11%. In April 2021, a year after the first wave of the pandemic, the total population with an active access 
to a digital identity was 20.3 million40, meaning digital identity adoption had increased by 269% to 40%.  
• 
Efforts have been made to simplify the activation of SPID for citizens by working through 
administrations which have, since October 2020, had a regulatory obligation to activate SPID and 
CIE for citizens. According to the Public Registration Authority Officer (RAO) model, citizens can 
visit an administration for their identity to be checked, free of charge, in order to pass the first phase 
of identification for a SPID. Administrations have received economic incentives from an Innovation 
Fund to support this process. In April 2021 there were 24 active administrations. 
• 
A further important contribution made by SPID during 2020-21 was as an 'enabling platform' to the 
IO app. The IO App debuted in April 2020 and is the app for Italian public services, which represents 
a single channel through which all local and national authorities offer their services to citizens 
directly on smartphones. As of April 2021, IO had been downloaded over 11 million times. SPID 
constitutes the most used and least burdensome way to access the IO app. The IO app allows 
citizens to benefit from further benefits such as: 
o 
Cashback - a 10% cashback on purchases with payment cards and apps registered on IO, as 
part of the “Cashless Italia” plan promoted by the Italian Government to reduce use of paper 
money and foster a more widespread adoption of digital payments. From December 8, 2020, 
more than 465 million transactions were processed by almost 8.5 million people, who added a 
total of 15.3 million payment methods.  
o 
Bonus Vacanze - a subsidy of up to 500 euros for citizens to support domestic tourism during 
the pandemic. From July 1, 2020, through IO 1,885,802 families obtained the Bonus Vacanze 
in less than 3 minutes on average (2.2 minutes in 80% of cases) and benefits were disbursed 
for an economic value of 829,431,050 euros. 
• 
Italy recognises that the introduction of a new identification scheme needs time to be adopted and 
needs to be communicated properly to the population. The rapid uptake of SPID has mostly been 
linked to the provision of new services on digital platforms accessible through SPID. Top-down 
governmental communication on new services being introduced has been instrumental in 
accelerating the digital identity uptake. The provision of new services and communication thereof 
in the press, TV, and social media, in particular welfare measures linked to the COVID-19 Recovery 
packages passed by the Government in 2020, proved instrumental in encouraging the uptake of 
digital identity. The launch of initiatives such as the 'buono vacanze' ('Holiday bonus') and the 
'cashback scheme' acted as an accelerator for the adoption of SPID digital identity. 
• 
During the COVID-19 crisis, SPID allowed access to online public services and financial support 
made available by the government. Alongside the availability of new services using SPID prompted 
by the pandemic, the Decreto Semplificazioni reflected the strong push by the government to 
mandate the use of SPID and CIE by public service teams. In 2020, some public sector 
organisations anticipated the deadlines of the Decree: for example, the Ministry of Labor and the 
National Institute of Social Security (INPS), which is the largest social security and welfare institute 
in Italy with approximately 200 online services for citizens with authentication, started the transition 
from PIN to SPID and CIE in October 2020. The INAIL(National Institute for Insurance against 
Accidents at Work) and the Agenzia delle Entrate (Italian Revenue Agency - which has about 200 
online services with authentication) have also started the transition from their own in-house 
credentials to the use of SPID and CIE, in line with the timing of the Decree. 
                                                
40 As of June 2021, 21 207 235 CIE cards have been activated and 21 540 028 SPID had been issued. However, given that individuals can have both 
a CIE and a SPID, the total number of Italian citizens and residents owning a digital identity is lower than the sum of the two. The reported figure in the 
text reflects the number of CIE or SPID issued. This means that the figure likely underestimates the total number of individuals in Italy with a digital 
identity (either CIE or SPID) in April 2021. 

58 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
The Italian government is currently working to improve SPID. In particular, the federal government is 
working to find ways of collaborating and coordinating with central and local entities more effectively, 
especially with regard to the delivery of specific and useful online services that would improve the number 
of citizens who adopt SPID or CIE. The Strategy 'Italia 2026' announced in April 2021 by the Minister of 
Innovation and Digital Transition aims at strengthening the uptake of digital identity (both CIE and SPID) 
in Italy. The Strategy aims at the adoption of digital identity by 70% of the adult population by 2026. 
The Strategy is consistent with the EU-wide targets put forward by the European Commission's 
Communication "2030 Digital Compass: the European way for the Digital Decade". In addition, Italy will 
leverage on the EU Recovery and Resilience Facility's funds to strengthen its digital identity system. In 
particular, CIE and SPID are expected to gradually become enabling platforms for a broader digital identity 
architecture. 
Italy furthermore aims at integrating its national digital identity with a self-sovereign digital identity wallet 
issued through mobile solutions, compliant with upcoming European legislation (Proposal for a Regulation 
amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 as regards to establishing a framework for a European Digital 
Identity (COM(2021) 281 final), 3 June 2021.  
Indonesia 
The Indonesian approach to digital identity has been in place since 2013 with the digital identity solution 
in electronic databases using Indonesia’s Single Identity Number as the primary key.  
At the moment, the digital identity solution for authentication and verification is implemented through digital 
certificate file and e-signatures.  
More than 3000 stakeholders from the public and private sectors have been involved in a cooperation 
agreement with the Directorate General of People Registry and Civil Registration of the Indonesian Ministry 
of Home Affairs to integrate, verify, and validate data in the implementation of digital identity. Up until July 
2021, the verification processes in the General Directorate of People Registry and Civil Registration has 
been completed 7 billion times, or 1-5 million times a day as a result from the cooperation agreement 
between the Ministry and corresponding stakeholders.  
The government intends to continuously improve the system through data utilisation, data interoperability, 
big data centralisation, as well as the implementation of smart card. 
Indonesia’s digital identity is underpinned by Government Regulation No.40 of 2019 on the Implementation 
of Act No.24 of 2014 of People's Civil Registration and Administration, and Government Regulation No. 71 
of 2019 on Electronic System and its implementing regulation. For the latter regulation, it governs the 
prerequisite for an e-Certificate provider, which may include provision of Digital Signature, which may 
potentially be utilised as Digital Identity. 
The development of digital identity is considered a priority area and will be carried out in conjunction with 
the establishment of personal data protection legislation which is also under development. These two areas 
are reflective alongside one another. In developing digital identity, Indonesia will further seek the benefits 
derived from international standards. 
Mexico 
Mexico is currently working on implementing its digital identity scheme including new laws to facilitate the 
transition. Today there are different isolated digital identity schemes in place. The Clave Única de Registro 

59 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
de Población (CURP) or the Unique Population Registration Code in English, is the national identification 
number used to access public sector and private sector services and it is assigned to all Mexican citizens.   
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the CURP has been of great value in terms of the administration of 
vaccination to the population. The most important lesson from the pandemic in relation to the development 
of digital identity is that the civil registry needs access to quality information and must have close 
collaboration with health sector institutions. 
Russia 
1. National context  
The current national digital identity of Russia is called the Unified Identification and Authentication System 
and is available to individuals aged 14 or above can have a digital identity. The system makes provision 
for the use of biometric data. 
Russia’s total population in 2021 was 146.2 million, and the total eligible population for digital identity based 
on age was therefore 122.3 million, or 84% of the total population.  
2. Current national Digital Identity management system  
The country model 
The digital identity model in Russia is for sector specific digital identity solutions with a reusable public 
sector digital identity. This means there are private sector solutions for accessing private sector services 
and a public sector solution that can be used for accessing both public and private sector services. 
• 
The Russian Ministry of Digital Development, Communications and Mass Media of the Russian 
Federation is in charge of steering the strategic direction and overseeing delivery of digital identity 
in the country  
• 
The identification standards and technical protocols for digital identity in Russia are set out by the 
Unified Identification and Authentication System. Methodological recommendations for the use of 
the Unified Identification System and Authentication Version 2.84 (2021) and Methodological 
recommendations for integration with the REST API of the Digital Profile. Version 1.16. (2021)  
• 
The Russian digital identity can be obtained through an online-only process. 
• 
Russia does not have a single unified identification number that is used across all services.  
Technical choices 
The different means for authentication used in Russia include e-signatures and username and password 
Portable (cross-platform, cross-sectoral, cross-border) digital identity 
• 
Cross-platform: Russia’s digital identity can be used on mobile devices. 
• 
Cross-sectoral: No information was provided about private sector usage of the national digital 
identity solution 
• 
Cross-border: Although Russia has no provision for recognising foreign digital identity solutions 
or enabling its reuse elsewhere, the Federal Law "On Personal Data" dated July 27, 2006 No. 152-
FZ, provides for a regulation concerning the conditions for the cross-border transfer of personal 
data. According to Article 12 of the Federal Law, data transfer (cross-border data flow) can be 

60 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
carried out to the territory of foreign states that provide adequate protection of the rights of subjects 
of personal data. These states include: 
o 
member states of the Council of Europe Convention No. 108 "On the Protection of Individuals 
with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data" (hereinafter - Council of Europe 
Convention No. 108);  
o 
states not party to the Council of Europe Convention No. 108 and ensuring adequate protection 
of the rights of subjects of personal data, included in a special list under the order of 
Roskomnadzor dated March 15, 2013 No. 274 "On approval of the list of foreign states that are 
not parties to the Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to 
Automated Processing of Personal Data and ensuring adequate protection of the rights of 
subjects of personal data ”.  
Data visibility and citizen consents 
In Russia, citizens have a legal right to opt out of the use of a digital identity. In accordance with clauses 
18.16 and 18.21 of Article 3 of the Federal Law of December 29, 2020 No. 479-FZ "On Amendments to 
Certain Legislative Acts of the Russian Federation", the refusal of an individual to undergo identification 
and (or) authentication using his biometric personal data cannot serve grounds for refusing to provide him 
with state or municipal services and services. 
The following legislation exists to protect a person's data connected to the use of a Digital Identity system: 
• 
Federal Law 63-FZ "On Electronic Signatures";  
• 
Federal Law 115-FZ "On Counteracting Legalization (Laundering) of Criminally Obtained Incomes 
and Financing of Terrorism";  
• 
Federal Law 126-FZ "On Communication";  
• 
Federal Law 149-FZ "On information, information technology and information protection";  
• 
Federal Law 210-FZ "On the organization of the provision of state and municipal services"  
• 
Federal Law 152-ФЗ "On Personal Data" dated July 27, 2006 (as amended on 12/30/2020);  
• 
Federal Law 259-FZ "On crowdfunding in Russia using investment platforms" dated August 2, 
2019;  
• 
Federal Law 482-FZ "On Amendments to Certain Legislative Acts of the Russian Federation" dated 
December 31, 2018, which establishes the legal basis for the collection of biometric personal data 
of Russian citizens and their placement in the Unified Biometric System. 
In Russia there is an independent authority monitoring and overseeing the impact of Digital Identity on 
individual privacy and freedoms. The Ombudsmen for Human Rights in the constituent entity of the Russian 
Federation. In case of complaints from citizens of the Russian Federation, foreign citizens or stateless 
persons about violation of the rights to private life and human freedom, the human rights ombudsman 
applies the procedure established by the Federal Law of May 2, 2006 No. 59-FZ "On the Procedure for 
Considering Appeals from Citizens of the Russian Federation ", taking into account the specifics of 
accepting for consideration and consideration of complaints by the human rights ombudsman in the 
constituent entity of the Russian Federation, established by Federal Law No. 48-FZ of March 18, 2020" On 
Ombudsmen for human rights in the constituent entities of the Russian Federation "). 
Protections exist to ensure that private sector actors cannot commercialise data obtained from Digital 
Identities without a user’s consent. In accordance with Article 7 of the Federal Law "On personal data" 
dated July 27, 2006 No. 152-FZ, operators and other persons who have gained access to personal data 
are obliged not to disclose to third parties and not to distribute personal data without the consent of the 
subject of personal data, unless otherwise provided by federal law. In addition, in accordance with Article 
5 of Chapter 2 of the Federal Law "On Personal Data" dated July 27, 2006 No. 152-FZ, the processing of 

61 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
personal data should be limited to the achievement of specific, predetermined, and legitimate goals. 
Processing of personal data that is incompatible with the purposes of collecting personal data is not 
allowed. Administrative liability is provided for violations of the law.  
The security of user data in private sector Digital Identity solutions is covered under the requirements of 
the Federal Law "On Personal Data" dated July 27, 2006 No. 152-FZ. Both public and private providers 
bear the same responsibility as provided for by the legislation of the Russian Federation. 
Russian citizens are not proactively informed by authorities about any processing of their personally 
identifiable data. However, users can access and see what attributes or data are being shared/re-used, 
and with/by whom. In accordance with paragraph 7 of Article 14 of the Federal Law "On personal data" 
dated July 27, 2006 No. 152-FZ, the subject of personal data has the right to receive information regarding 
the processing of his personal data, including information containing:  
• 
confirmation of the fact of processing personal data by the operator,  
• 
legal grounds and purposes of processing personal data,  
• 
goals and the methods of processing personal data used by the operator,  
• 
the name and location of the operator,  
• 
information about persons (except for the operator's employees) who have access to personal data 
or to whom personal data may be disclosed on the basis of an agreement with the operator or on 
the basis of federal law,  
• 
the processed personal data related to the relevant subject of personal data,  
• 
the source of their receipt. 
Unless another procedure for submitting such data is provided for by federal law, processing of personal 
data, including the terms of their storage, the procedure for exercising by the subject of personal data the 
rights (provided for by this Federal Law), information about the carried out or about the intended cross-
border data transfer, the name or surname, name, patronymic and address of the person who processes 
personal data on behalf of the operator, if the processing is entrusted or will be entrusted to such a person, 
other information provided for by this Federal Law or other federal laws.  
Russian citizens can provide and revoke consent for the re-use and sharing of attributes or data originating 
from their Digital Identity. 
Civil society organisations are not able to monitor the process by which a person's identifiable data is 
shared and reused. 
The processing of a person’s identifiable data is governed in terms of proportionality or legitimacy 
according to Article 5 of the Federal Law of July 27, 2006 No. 152-ФЗ "On personal data". This covers the 
following principles:  
• 
processing of personal data should be carried out on a legal and fair basis; 
• 
the processing of personal data should be limited to the achievement of specific, predetermined, 
and legitimate purposes. (Processing of personal data that is incompatible with the purposes of 
collecting personal data is not allowed);  
• 
only personal data that meet the purposes of their processing are subject to processing; 
• 
the content and volume of the processed personal data must correspond to the stated purposes of 
the processing. (The processed personal data should not be redundant in relation to the stated 
purposes of their processing); 
• 
when processing personal data, the accuracy of personal data, their sufficiency, and, if necessary, 
relevance in relation to the purposes of processing personal data must be ensured. (The operator 
must take the necessary measures or ensure their acceptance to remove or clarify incomplete or 
inaccurate data).  

62 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity  
In December 2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, the number of individuals with a digital 
identity was 103 million. The percentage of the eligible population that had a digital identity was therefore 
84%. No data was supplied relating to adoption figures following the pandemic. 
However, in Russia it is not mandatory for public sector organisations to use the national digital identity 
solution. Annually, 230 million authentication events are registered using the system. 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
There is a huge increase in demand for remote identification due to COVID-19.  
Various cases using biometrics for individuals and legal entities are being piloted within the framework of 
the FinTech Association projects "Remote Identification" and "Digital Profile", together with banks and 
insurance companies. For example, remote identification of clients and opening an account. In addition, 
proposals for legal regulation and standardization are being worked out. 
The ongoing, and increasing, costs associated with verifying the digital identity of a person (a set of 
technologies and smart devices that make it possible to verify a person using digital information: biometrics, 
digital passports, IDs, passwords, PIN codes, QR codes) will continue. This factor must be taken into 
account when forming the corresponding budgets. It can be assumed that COVID-19 will launch a wave 
of legislative changes around the world and as a result, the possibilities for using remote identification will 
expand. At the same time, the technologies themselves will change. On the one hand, the fight against the 
coronavirus will lead to a sharp decline in the use of fingerprint scanners for personal identification, since 
these devices must be touched with a hand. There will also be requirements for the use of antimicrobial 
materials in such terminals.  
Saudi Arabia 
1. National context  
In Saudi Arabia, citizens above 10 years old can request a digital identity. The total population of the 
country in 2021 was 35 million, with the total population eligible for a digital identity (based on age) 24.4 
million, or 70% of the total population. 
2. Current national Digital Identity management system  
The country model 
The IAM system in Saudi Arabia is centralised with third party IdPs brokers. Authentication is made based 
on assurance levels, either using two factors (National ID / Password, SMS) for major public services, or 
using biometrics/digital certificates based on service criticality (risk-based assessment). Currently there 
are no differences in services provided for either public or non-public sector except that non-public sector 
usage gets charged compared to public services which are offered for free. 
The Digital Government Authority (DGA) steers the strategic direction for and vision of digital identity in 
the country, and the Saudi Data and Artificial Intelligence Authority (SDAIA) oversees the delivery of the 
digital identity, including IdPs. The government provides funds for government IdP to provide services to 
the public sector free of charge, whereas private IdPs brokers are self-funded since they are generating 
revenues through transaction cost. 

63 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
There are a set of standards in place in Saudi Arabia related to digital identity life-cycle management, 
digital certificates, technical standards for identity and access management (IAM) technologies, and 
biometric technologies. The Saudi government assesses and certifies the quality of private identity 
providers in line with the identification standards through periodic audits as set in agreements with IdP's. 
The Saudi government collaborates with the private sector in order to contribute to the digital identity on 
boarding process and by acting as third party IdPs brokers, including IdPs and banks and financial services 
providers. 
Users in Saudi Arabia can obtain a digital identity through an online-only process. For individuals, they 
must first link their mobile number to a digital identity account using either KIOSKs (which are distributed 
across the country) or through the digital identity website to provide their information. In Saudi Arabia, the 
civil registration systems act as the national identification number to connect records across services. As 
for businesses, the owner needs to have a digital identity before requesting to issue a commercial 
registration. Then he would follow the same steps as an individual using the business option on the 
website.  
Technical choices 
The means for authentication of a digital identity in Saudi Arabia include smartcards, digital certificate file, 
and two-factor authentication that confirms access to a mobile phone number or that requires access to 
biometric information.  
• 
Per month, approximately 5000 authentications/verifications are issued with a smartcard by any 
available digital identity solution 
• 
1.1 million authentications/verifications are issued per month with two-factor authentication that 
requires access to a mobile phone number. 
• 
There are no available figures on the number of authentication/verifications issued that require 
access to biometric information. The most common service requiring biometric information is 
notarization services. Biometric data are stored as per related standards, and only qualified readers 
are allowed to be used. 
Portable (cross-platform, cross-sectoral, cross-border) digital identity 
• 
Cross-platform: The digital identity solutions in Saudi Arabia can be accessed from different 
mobile devices.  
• 
Cross-service: In Saudi Arabia, non-public sector organisations can use the available digital 
identity solution for service user authentication/verification.  
• 
Cross-border: A technical team represents the member countries in the Gulf Cooperation Council 
(GCC) responsible for integrating national digital identity systems in GCC countries. This technical 
team is supervised by a ministerial level committee from GCC countries within the council. As of 
today, the digital identity system of Bahrain is fully integrated with the Saudi digital identity system. 
Saudi Arabia is in the process of integrating its system also with the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, 
Kuwait and Oman. For Saudi Arabia, when agreeing to mutual recognition of Digital Identity 
between countries, they use legislation and policy mapping to establish the extent to which privacy 
protection and data security approaches of the other country are consistent with their domestic 
policies. GCC countries share some mandatory laws or model laws that facilitate this process. 
Data visibility and citizen consents 
In Saudi Arabia, individuals do not have a legal right to opt out of the use of digital identity. 

64 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
Saudi Arabia has established the National Data Management Office (NDMO) as the national regulator of 
data in the Kingdom, NDMO has developed the framework for national data governance to set the policies 
and regulations required for data classification, data sharing, data privacy, Freedom of Information, open 
data and others. 
Today, citizens are not proactively informed by authorities about the processing of their data. Users are 
not able access and see what attributes or data are being shared/re-used, and with/by whom, nor provide 
and revoke consent for the re-use and sharing of attributes or data originating from their digital identity.  
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity  
In Saudi Arabia, it is mandatory for public sector organisations to use the available digital identity solutions 
for service user authentication and verification. To support public sector teams in adopting digital identity 
solutions, they are provided with awareness sessions, integration guides, software integration tools, 
technical support, legal documents, and service-level agreements. As of today, 75%-99% of public sector 
services where it would be necessary to authenticate users are using available digital identity solutions. 
The other services are still using other previously built means of authentications (mostly 
username/password, SMS). On average, individuals use the available digital identity solution to access or 
consume any public sector service 49 times per year.  
In December 2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, the number of individuals with a digital 
identity was 16 million. The percentage of the eligible population that had a digital identity was therefore 
66%. In April 2021, a year after the first wave of the pandemic, the total population with an active access 
to a digital identity was 21 million, meaning the share of eligible population with a digital identity had 
increased with roughly 20 percentage points to 86%.  
During the COVID-19 pandemic, Saudi Arabia benefitted from digital identity to help organize the curfew 
and issue permits to individuals to help control quarantine and the spread of COVID-19. Almost all sectors 
including digital payment, health services, commercial, retail, ICT, Judicial and more benefitted from digital 
identity to meet needs during the pandemic. The most important lesson learned for Saudi Arabia from the 
COVID-19 pandemic in relation to the development and use of digital identity is the value of trusted, 
portable and cross-platform digital identity solutions.  
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms in Saudi Arabia 
Saudi Arabia is developing a national strategy for digital identity, comprising Governance Model, Digital 
identity and trust services, Operating model and service delivery, Legislation, Standards, Return on 
investment and liquidation, and technical architecture. Furthermore, the country is updating the e-
transaction law (draft Digital Transactions and Trust Services Law) to add more legal provisions related to 
digital identities and trust services, and to harmonize with other international laws like e-IDAS and UN 
model laws. 
Saudi Arabia has plans to pursue self-sovereign identity in the future, which are detailed in the current 
national strategy for digital identity.  
The biggest lessons learned by Saudi Arabia from their digital identity reforms include  
• 
That harmonization of digital identity regulations is key to achieve interoperability and cross-
borders online services. 
• 
That it is paramount to align government and private entities on strategy and direction for digital 
identity 
• 
The need for clear governance that covers digital identity regulations, digital identity service 
providers, data privacy regulation, sustainability models, investment models, etc.  

65 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
Singapore 
1. National context  
Singpass and Corppass are the national digital identities of Singapore for natural persons and corporate 
entities. The total population of Singapore is 5.6 million. Individuals can obtain the SingPass at 15 years 
of age, meaning that the total eligible population for SingPass is 4.2 million people or 75% of the total 
population.  
2. Current national Digital Identity management system  
The country model 
Singapore’s National Digital Identity (NDI) is a Strategic National Project implemented and managed by 
the Government Technology Agency (GovTech) under the Smart Nation Digital Government Group 
(SNDGG). SNDGG was formed in 2017 housed under the Prime Minister’s Office. 
The development of the Singapore’s National Digital Identity is funded by the government. 
Singapore’s NDI assurance level references a combination of NIST IAL and AAL, as well as multiple 
authentication factors to provide higher assurance when required. Higher NDI assurance level could be 
achieved by using a combination of more than one authentication factors offered by Singpass (e.g. 
Singpass app with Face Verification with Singpass). Singpass supports “stepped-up” authentication (use 
of additional authentication factors for high risk/value transactions). 
Private sector organizations play the role of a Relying Party that integrates and adopts Singpass products. 
Private sector organizations could also integrate the Sign with Singpass into their product to offer digital 
signing as a commercial solution. 
NDI serves as a digital infrastructure and trust platform that enables Singapore residents and businesses 
to transact digitally with the Government and private sector in a convenient and secure manner. As a result 
of this government led initiative, private sector companies can tap on the NDI digital infrastructure to obtain 
high identity assurance online, verified against authoritative government data sources without building 
infrastructure from scratch. To allow government agencies and businesses to access NDI’s Trusted 
Services, we have introduced Singpass app, a mobile application that users mainly interface with, and 
seven application programming interface (api) products namely Authorise, Identiface, Login, Myinfo, Notify, 
Sign, and Verify on the NDI platform. 
Singapore residents and businesses can tap on the Myinfo API product to share government originated 
personal and corporate information upon consent. Some use cases are identifying yourself when applying 
for a bank loan online and proving of identity in a physical setting with digital identity cards. Singpass Face 
Verification API product – Identiface, enables businesses to adopt face verification technology without the 
need to set up. The single National Identification Number used across all services are retrieved from the 
Singapore government, Immigration & Checkpoints Authority 
Users can obtain the Singpass through an online-only process: 
• 
Users will first check for eligibility and register for Singpass at www.singpass.gov.sg 
• 
The user’s Singpass password will be mailed to the user’s local registered address 
• 
To complete the setup process, the user will need to log into their account using the mailed 
password via the Singpass portal or Singpass app 
• 
Upon successful login, the user’s account will be activated and complete the online application 
process. 

66 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
The Singaporean government is in the process of implementing Face Verification to augment the 
onboarding of users. 
Technical choices 
The means used for authentication in the national digital identity system include digital certificate, E-
signatures, username and password, and two-factor authentication that confirms access to an email 
account, a mobile phone number, a mobile device, or that requires access to biometric information.  
• 
100% of the population that has a digital identity uses digital certificates and per month 8.5 million 
authentications are issued with this means.  
• 
64% of the population that has a digital identity uses E-signatures and per month 37 000 
authentications are issued with this means.  
• 
5% of the population that has a digital identity uses username and password, and per month, 900 
000 authentications are issued with this means. 
• 
25% of the population that has a digital identity uses two-factor authentication that confirms access 
to a mobile phone number, and per month, 2 million authentications are issued with this means. 
• 
70% of the population that has a digital identity uses two-factor authentication that confirms access 
to a mobile device, and per month, 8.5 million authentications are issued with this means. 
• 
70% of the population that has a digital identity uses two-factor authentication that requires access 
to biometric information, and per month, 17 000 authentications are issued with this means. 
Portable (cross-platform, cross-sectoral, cross-border) digital identity 
• 
Cross-platform: The national digital identity of Singapore can be used through different mobile 
devices and is therefore considered cross-platform portable.  
• 
Cross-sectoral: Singpass can be used by both public and private sector service providers to 
authenticate the identity of service users and is therefore considered cross-sectoral-portable. 
• 
Cross-border: Singapore does currently not recognise any other country's digital identities for 
service user authentication and verification.   
Data visibility and citizen consents 
Singapore’s Personal Data Protection Act (PDPA) regulates the process of personal data in Singapore.  
Citizens are proactively informed about the processing of their personal data by government authorities. 
Users can access the transaction history of Myinfo in the Singpass app to see what attributes or data are 
shared, and who the data is shared with. For Myinfo data transactions, the digital service will direct the 
users to authenticate themselves using Singpass. Upon successful authentication, the user will be 
redirected to a consent page where the transaction purpose, and data items requested will be shown to 
the user. Upon consent, the user completes the transaction and a notification will be sent to the user 
showing a list of data items involved in the transaction. This information on the attributes or data that are 
shared and who the data is shared with are also made available in the Singpass app.  
Users are required to give consent before using biometrics for authentication purposes. When the system 
captures a user’s facial image, it is compared against the Government’s biometric database (e.g. NRIC, 
Singapore Passport or Work Pass photo) for authentication purposes. Liveness detection technology 
solutions are incorporated into the authentication process to detect fraudulent access involving the use of 
photographs, videos, or masks. All captured facial images are encrypted and protected with advanced 
technologies to prevent unauthorised access. Additional measures, such as security incident monitoring, 
are also put in place to ensure that a user’s personal data is securely protected. Relying parties would 

67 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
receive a verification result after comparison. They do not need to build, secure and maintain biometric 
databases. The Government systems will only keep the captured facial images for 30 days for audit 
purposes. Thereafter, the images will be deleted. The user’s data will not be used for any surveillance or 
commercial purposes. 
For every data sharing transaction with the private sector, all users must give their consent in order to 
complete the transaction. Prior to onboarding of the private sector service, these use cases are screened 
by the government. Private sector actors are also required to comply with Singapore’s PDPA (Personal 
Data Protection Act), which permits the disclosure of information only with consent of the individual. 
Because of contact tracing efforts, public officers and contact tracers require access to sensitive personal 
information. Singapore reports that the rapid roll out of new technology presents risks in Data Governance 
and Data Security: 
• 
Knowingly or reckless data disclosure without authorisation; 
• 
Data misuse that results in personal gain for the public officer or another person, or harm or loss 
to another person 
• 
Knowingly or recklessly re-identify anonymised information without authorisation. 
The COVID (Temporary Measures) Act (“CTMA”) specifies that public sector agencies can use personal 
contact tracing data recorded in digital contact tracing systems (such as TraceTogether (TT) and SafeEntry 
(SE)) only for the purpose of carrying out contact tracing, except where there is a need for police officers 
and law enforcement officers to use the data for criminal investigations and proceedings in respect of 
seven categories of serious offences. These are offences of a significant severity and/or pose an 
immediate threat to life or public safety, such as use of firearms and dangerous weapons, terrorism, 
murder, drug offences that attract death penalty, kidnapping and rape. These categories of offences are 
set out in the Seventh Schedule of the CTMA and the Government cannot amend the list of offences 
without Parliamentary approval. The CTMA covers personal contact tracing data – proximity data, locations 
visited, and user information collected through SE or TT, and which is able to identify an individual. The 
legislation specifies the following safeguards: 
• 
No further collection will be allowed as soon as the pandemic ends and all data collected thus far 
will be deleted as soon as practicable, 
• 
The Government may not use the data for any purpose other than those specified in the CTMA, 
regardless of any other written law requiring or allowing the disclosure of the data. 
• 
Stiff penalties are meted out for any contravention of the Act (up to 2 years’ imprisonment or up to 
$20,000 fine) 
The legislation is the result of a delicate balance between the right to public health, the right to public 
security and respecting the sensitivity of personal data during this extraordinary time of an ongoing 
pandemic. 
Administratively, the Government has robust internal policies and guidelines on data governance, and 
especially so for personal and contact tracing data. In 2019, the Government also convened a Public Sector 
Data Security Review Committee (PSDSRC) to review how the Government is securing and protecting 
citizens’ data from end-to-end, and to recommend measures and an action plan to improve the 
Government’s protection of citizens’ data and response to incidents. Public agencies with access to the 
personal digital contact tracing data are obliged, by way of the Public Sector (Governance) Act, to 
safeguard the data in accordance with internally-prescribed data security requirements. These include the 
recommendations made by the Public Sector Data Security Review Committee in 2019. 

68 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity  
• 
In Singapore, it is mandatory for public sector organisations to use the National Digital Identity for 
service user authentication and verification. Today, 75%-99% of all public services where it is 
necessary to authenticate users are using the national digital identity solution, remaining services 
are using manual registration based on details on Physical Identity Card.  On average, individuals 
use the Singpass 50 times per year to access any public service. In order to support public sector 
teams, An Inter-Ministerial Committee oversees Singapore’s National Digital Identity programme. 
The strong political support facilitates the adoption and implementation of NDI across the public 
sector. Public sector teams can also access the Singpass API portal (https://api.singpass.gov.sg) 
to access resources to onboard onto the various Singpass products (National Digital Identity 
solution). These resources include an API library, onboarding tutorials and guidelines, technical 
specifications, implementation templates and sandbox APIs to encourage ease of onboarding. The 
combination of strong political support and support for technical implementation is instrumental to 
the successful implementation of National Digital Identity across the public sector. 
• 
Non-public sector teams can access the Singpass API portal (https://api.singpass.gov.sg) to 
access resources to onboard onto the various Singpass products. These resources include an API 
library, onboarding tutorials and guidelines, technical specifications, implementation templates and 
sandbox APIs to encourage ease of onboarding. 
• 
In April 2019, during the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, 872 000 individuals or 21% of the 
eligible population had a Singpass. In April 2021, the share of eligible population with the Singpass 
had increased with 210% to 2.7 million people, which is 64% of the eligible population   
• 
The National Digital Identity programme supported the digitisation of contact tracing processes. 
SafeEntry is an example of a product that builds on the foundation of NDI. Its objective is to enable 
authorised contact tracers to quickly obtain identity information of visitors to a physical location. 
This information is used as a credible reference to uncover locations visited by confirmed cases, 
identify possible clusters and identify locations for deep cleaning. To use SafeEntry, users give 
their consent to the transfer of personal information upon scanning a SafeEntry QR code to check 
in whenever they visit a location.  
• 
Digital readiness has enabled Singapore to respond quickly to the pandemic. With a ready digital 
infrastructure, Singaporean residents could have seamless and secure digital access to 
government services without physical interactions. This helped to significantly mitigate some of the 
disruptions arising from the necessary public health measures in response to tackling the 
pandemic. 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms  
NDI aims to be secure and widely adopted by citizens and businesses to exchange information and enable 
hosting other transactions that require identification. From an identity management tool that allowed secure 
access to government services only, NDI has evolved to enable everyday transactions for citizens (e.g. 
signing off the receipt of a delivery package) and high value transactions that require highly verifiable, non-
repudiable digital signatures (e.g. purchase of insurance). 
In addition to a National Digital Identity for individuals and Corporate Digital Identity for businesses, 
Singapore is progressively building a mobile version of a Corporate Digital Identity for businesses. This 
with the aim to cater for the increasing volume of electronic corporate transactions by introducing a 
corporate alternative to an individual’s digital identity and enabling corporations to leverage our Digital 
Signature products. 
Singapore is looking to establish cross border interoperability with other countries, i.e. for our National 
Digital Identities to be compatible with other countries’, and vice versa. Identity verification is often needed 

69 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
in cross-border transactions, such as visa applications, business registration, etc. These processes are 
onerous and time-consuming, and it is a pain point that having interoperable Digital Identities can address. 
Singapore is exploring the extension of its current Digital Identity system to include decentralized identity 
especially for cross border transactions. Singapore considers that governments can continue to play the 
role of being a trust digital identity provider in a decentralised digital identity system.  
Spain 
1. National context  
Documento Nacional de Identidad electrónico (DNIe) is the Spanish national electronic ID card used for 
digital identification of natural persons. The electronic DNI is a proof of identity which is acknowledged by 
the Kingdom of Spain as the official electronic accreditation document corresponding to the personal 
identity of its holder and to the electronic signing of documents41.  
Spain’s population is 47 million, with 42 million people or 89% of the total population eligible for the DNIe.  
2. Current national Digital Identity management system  
The country model 
The country model for digital identity in Spain is a shared model where the management of digital 
identity is handled through a partnership between public and private sectors and where the identity 
itself is used to access both public and private sector services. 
• 
The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Digital Transformation and Ministry for Home Affairs steers 
the strategic direction of and vision for digital identity.  
• 
There is a single supervisor body the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Digital Transformation for 
the trust service providers issuing qualified certificates (allowed to use for access public services). 
The responsibility of the issuing of the DNIe is assigned to the Ministry for Home Affairs through 
the National Police General Directorate (DGP) 
• 
DNIe is funded by public funding 
• 
European standards, eIDAs Regulation. There eIDAS supervisory body for the trust service 
providers assess the conformity of qualified services providers according to eIDAS Regulation and 
its implementing acts by means of an administrative procedure. The trust service providers are 
obliged to send to the SB a conformity assessment report issued by a conformity assessment body, 
according to eIDAS Regulation. 
• 
eIDs based on qualified electronic certificates issued by service providers (public or private) 
included in the trusted lists of qualified trust service providers required by the Regulation (EC) No 
910/2014/EU(eIDAS), as those included in the Documento Nacional de Identidad electrónico 
(DNIe-electronic National Identity Document www.dnielectronico.es) or other means like systems 
based on keys.  
• 
For public sector, there is an eID gateway called Cl@ve that is a common platform for identification 
and authentication. This system means Public Administrations do not need to implement and 
                                                
41Notification Form for Electronic Identity Scheme under Article 9(5) of Regulation EU 910/2014, Official Journal of the European 
Union,  pp.9: 
https://ec.europa.eu/cefdigital/wiki/display/EIDCOMMUNITY/Spain?preview=/62885675/65972507/Notificacion%20DNIe_2015_19
84_EN%20(6).pdf 

70 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
manage their own identification and signature systems. Equally, citizens do not have to use their 
own identification methods to interact electronically with the Administration. This gateway allows 
the use of identification systems based on keys (username and password systems) as well as 
electronic certificates (including the DNIe). (https://clave.gob.es/) 
• 
In May 2021, a Ministerial Order was issued regulating remote identification by video identification 
methods for issuing qualified certificates. The trust service providers are now starting to implement 
the methods. National Identification Document, issued by National Police Department (Ministry for 
Home Affairs) 
Technical choices 
The different means for authentication used in Spain include smartcards; digital certificate files; and two 
factor authentication (2FA) that confirms access to a mobile phone number 
Portable (cross-platform, cross-sectoral, cross-border) digital identity 
• 
Cross-platform: The Spanish eID is not available through mobile devices.  
• 
Cross-sectoral: In Spain, private service providers can use DNIe for service user authentication 
and verification. 
• 
Cross-border: Governed and made possible by the EU eIDAS Regulation. Currently the national 
eID from 13 other EU Member States can be used for authentication and verification in order to 
access public sector services in Spain: Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Estonia, Croatia, Belgium, 
Portugal, Netherlands, Czech Republic, Latvia, Slovakia, Denmark, Lithuania. The eIDAS 
Regulation and GDPR determines the extent to which privacy protection and data security 
approaches of other countries are consistent with Spain’s policies when agreeing on mutual 
recognition.  
Data visibility and citizen consents 
In Spain, citizens have a legal right to opt out of the use of Digital Identity 
The European GDPR (Regulation (EU) 2016/679, General Data Protection Regulation) and National Law 
on data protection and digital rights (Ley Orgánica 3/2018, de Protección de Datos Personales y garantía 
de los derechos digitales). eIDAS Regulation establishes security requirements for eID systems and for 
trust services providers. GDPR is also of application to the providers and establishes the security measures 
for data protection. 
The Data Protection Authority (DPA) is not specifically targeted at Digital Identity but provides an oversight 
function. 
Citizens are proactively informed by authorities about any processing of their personally identifiable data 
and can provide and revoke consent for the re-use and sharing of attributes or data originating from their 
Digital Identity 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity  
In Spain, it is mandatory for public sector organisations to use the eID for user authentication and 
verification. For public sector, there is an eID gateway called Cl@ve that is a common platform for 
identification and authentication. This system that prevents Public Administrations from having to 
implement and manage their own identification and signature systems, and citizens having to use different 
identification methods to interact electronically with the Administration. This gateway allows the use of 
identification systems based on keys (username and password systems) as well as electronic certificates 
(including the DNIe). (https://clave.gob.es/) Resources such as integration packages are available and 

71 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
there is support to help the public sector teams. 100% of public sector services where it would be necessary 
to authenticate users are using the eID. eID is used to access or consume  public sector services 350 
million times per year.  
During lock-down, one lesson learnt was the need to have a remote identification system to issue qualified 
certificates in order that the citizens can access public services without the need of physical presence. We 
put in place a transitional measure for this purpose during the state of alarm in March and June 2020, and 
recently in May 2021 a Ministerial Order establishing the requirements for video identification has been 
adopted. 
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
A pilot of Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) is foreseen within the framework of the European Blockchain 
Services Infrastructure (EBSI) working group of the European Commission. Spain considers that 
governments in a SSI system should have the role and power to provide the identity to all the citizens. It is 
the only way to ensure that the person acquiring the digital identity is really who claims to be. That should 
be the basis of the system, but also that governments should regulate and supervise the providers of 
identities and attributes, and monitor compliance with data privacy and respect of fundamental rights of 
the citizens. 
Spain will observe developments under the EU proposal for a Regulation on digital identity. 
Turkey 
1. National context  
The national digital identity system in Turkey used for accessing public sector services is provided through 
the e-Government Gateway. The digital identity system is available to: 
• 
citizens of the Republic of Turkey, who are over the age of 15,  
• 
blue card holders  
• 
foreigners, with a photographic identity card (identity card, marriage certificate, passport and 
driver's license, lawyer identity card, blue card, residence permit, judge and prosecutor identity 
cards, valid work permit card) 
Individuals obtain their e-Government Gateway passwords in person or through a power of attorney from 
PTT (Turkish Post) offices, central directorates, or authorized branches. Persons who have been appointed 
as guardians by a court decision can obtain an e-Government Gateway password through their guardians.  
Turkey’s total population in 2021 was 83.6 million, and the total eligible population for digital identity based 
on age was therefore 64.5 million, or 77% of the total population.  
2. Current national Digital Identity management system  
The country model 
The model for digital identity system in Turkey is sector specific with reusable public sector digital identity. 
This implies that there are private sector managed digital identity systems for accessing private sector 
services and a public sector managed digital identity system for accessing both public and private sector 
services. 
• 
The task of establishing and managing the e-Government Gateway is assigned to the Presidency 
Digital Transformation Office, and the development and operation of the system are carried out by 

72 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
Türksat Company (Türksat Uydu Haberleşme Kablo TV ve İşletme A.Ş.). The PTT General 
Directorate (Turkish Post) provides citizens with the Digital Turkey passwords as the institution with 
the most widespread distribution network throughout the country.  
• 
The Turkish government collaborates with mobile operators (Türksat), banks and financial services 
providers, and software companies for the development and operation of the national digital identity 
system. Identity providers in Turkey are financed by the government and financial institutions. 
• 
The following identity standards exist in Turkey:  
o 
eİDAS and standards related to eİDAS Plus 
o 
Standards for the application of identity cards: ICAO 9303, ISO/IEC 14443, ISO/IEC 7810, 
ISO/IEC 7816, TS 13678, TS 13679, TS 13680, TS 13681, TS 13582, TS 13583, TS 13584, 
TS 13585, PCI.  
• 
In Turkey, it is not possible for citizens to obtain their e-Government Gateway password through 
an online-only process. Face-to-face authentication is a part of secure password applications. 
Citizens over the age of 65 and who have not received a password before have the right to apply 
for delivery to their home address. The process for obtaining a digital identity is: 
o 
The individual submits their identity number and photo containing ID to the PTT (Turkish Post) 
central directorates or authorized branches. Alternatively, the password can be obtained from 
the PTT branches through the power of attorney or the guardianship document provided by the 
relevant judicial units. The password can also be obtained from Embassies and Consulates 
abroad. 
o 
Another option is that if an individual logs into the e-Government Gateway using a mobile 
signature, electronic signature or internet banking, the password can be created directly on the 
portal but requires the user to be able to authenticate themselves through the other means. 
Individuals can also log in to the system with an electronic ID card and then create a password.  
Technical choices 
The different means for authentication used in Turkey include smartcards; digital certificate files; e-
signatures; username and password; and two factor authentication (2FA) that confirms access to email 
account, mobile phone number, or mobile device.  
Turkey's digital identity is based on Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and One Time Password (OTP). 
Blockchain-based digital identity will be available soon. 
Turkey reports that user privacy has been well protected during the COVID-19 pandemic. Türksat, that 
runs the e-Government Gateway, holds the ISO 27001 information security management system certificate 
and undergoes regular audits. In addition, security and penetration tests are conducted by independent 
security companies for the e-Government Gateway. All information presented on the e-Government 
Gateway is instantly obtained from the relevant institutions, compiled and presented to citizens. The e-
Government Gateway only authenticates citizens and receives the information from the systems of the 
institution that owns the data over secure communication networks. Each citizen can only access their own 
information. 
All of the information about the services accessible through the e-Government Gateway is provided by the 
relevant public institution. Data traffic between institutions and e-Government Gateway systems is 
protected at the highest possible level since the information is not stored in the e-Government Gateway 
systems but displayed instantly from institutions. The entire system is monitored on a 7/24 basis and 
responds promptly to all extraordinary events. 

73 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
Portable (cross-platform, cross-sectoral, cross-border) digital identity 
• 
Cross-platform: The national digital identity of Turkey can be accessed via different mobile 
devices. 
• 
Cross-sectoral: The e-Government Gateway digital identity passwords are only used for 
accessing public services. However, as the e-Government Gateway authentication platform allows 
individuals to authenticate themselves via the authentication platforms of several banks, the 
banking digital identity solutions in Turkey are considered cross-sectoral.  
• 
Cross-border: No other country digital identity is recognised for service user authentication or 
verification in Turkey.  
Data visibility and citizen consents 
In Turkey, citizens have a legal right to opt out of the use of digital identity. There are no public services 
that cannot be accessed by individuals that exercise this right. 
In Turkey, The Law on the Protection of Personal Data No. 6698 was published in the Official Gazette on 
7 April 2016 and 29677 numbered entered into force. Turkish Data Protection Authority was established 
under the same Law. In Turkey the Human Rights and Equality Institution of Turkey, affiliated to the Ministry 
of Justice, with public legal entity status and administrative and financial autonomy, established by law No. 
6701 based on the international law monitors and oversees the impact of digital Identity on individual 
privacy and freedoms. The authority is not independent but has offsite and onsite investigatory power and 
sanctioning power.  
In Turkey, personal data may be processed only in cases where one of the following conditions is met: 
• 
The data subject has given his/her explicit consent. 
• 
It is expressly provided for by the laws. 
• 
It is necessary for the protection of life or physical integrity of the person himself/ herself or of any 
other person, who is unable to explain his/her consent due to the physical disability or whose 
consent is not deemed legally valid. 
• 
Processing of personal data of the parties of a contract is necessary if it is directly related to the 
establishment or performance of the contract. 
• 
It is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the data controller is subject. 
• 
Personal data being made public by the data subject himself/herself. 
• 
Data processing is necessary for the establishment, exercise or protection of any right. 
• 
Processing of data is necessary for the legitimate interests pursued by the controller, provided that 
this processing does not violate the fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject. 
Pursuant to Article 4, Personal data shall only be processed in compliance with procedures and principles 
laid down in Personal Data Protection Law or other laws. The following principles shall be complied with 
while processing of personal data: 
• 
Lawfulness and fairness 
• 
Being accurate and kept up to date where necessary. 
• 
Being processed for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes. 
• 
Being relevant, limited and proportionate to the purposes for which they are processed. 
• 
Being stored for the period laid down by relevant legislation or required for the purpose for which 
the personal data are processed. 

74 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
Natural persons whose personal data are processed have right to request to data controllers within the 
scope of their rights specified in Article 11 of the Law. This right consists of the followings: 
a) to learn whether his/her personal data are processed or not, 
b) to demand for information as to his/her personal data have been processed, 
c) to learn the purpose processing of his/her data and whether these personal data are used in 
compliance with the purpose,  
d) to know the third parties to whom his personal data are transferred in country or abroad, 
e) to request the rectification of the incomplete or inaccurate data, if any, 
f) 
to request the erasure or destruction of his/her personal data under the conditions referred to 
in Article 7, 
g) to request reporting of the operations carried out in compliance with sub-paragraphs (d) and e) 
to third parties to whom his personal data have been transferred, 
h) to object to the occurrence of a result against the person himself/herself by analyzing the 
processed data solely through automated systems, 
i) 
 to claim compensation for the damage arising from the unlawful processing of his/her personal 
data. 
Data subjects shall make a request to data controllers within the scope of their rights specified in Article 
11 of the Law, in writing or by registered electronic mail (KEP) address, secured electronic signature, 
mobile signature or by the e-mail address which has been previously entered into the data controllers’ 
system or through a software or application designed for purposes of this request. The data controller is 
obliged to take necessary organizational and technical measures to conclude the requests to be made by 
data subject within the scope of the Communiqué, effectively and complying with norms of lawfulness and 
fairness. Data controller shall act on the requests or refuses them together with justified grounds. Data 
controller shall communicate its response to the data subject in writing or by electronic means Data 
controllers shall conclude the demands in the request within the shortest time by taking into account the 
nature of the demand and at the latest within thirty days and free of charge. However, if process requires 
additional costs, fees may be charged in the tariff specified in Article 7 of the Communiqué. If the request 
is caused due to the fault of the data controller, the fee is refunded to data subject. 
Laws and mechanisms in Turkey to ensure the security of user data in private sector identity solutions and 
that private sector actors cannot commercialise data obtained from digital identities without a user’s 
consent include the Turkish Personal Data Protection Legislation, regular audits by the Personal Data 
Protection Authority, Banking Law No. 5411 and sub-regulations.  
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity  
The use of digital identity for service user authentication and verification is mandatory for public sector 
organisations in Turkey. As a result, 50%-74% of public services where it is necessary to authenticate 
users are using the available digital identity solutions. The remaining services are carried out in traditional, 
administrative ways. On average, individuals use the available digital identity solution to access or 
consume any public sector service 43 times per year. The government has different mechanisms in place 
to provide technical and financial support to public sector teams implementing the digital identity solutions. 
In December 2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, the number of individuals with a digital 
identity was 45 million. The percentage of the eligible population that had a digital identity was therefore 
70%. In April 2021, a year after the first wave of the pandemic, the total population with an active access 
to a digital identity was 54 million, meaning digital identity adoption had increased by 21% reaching 84% 
of the eligible population. 

75 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
During the COVID-19 pandemic Turkey pursued an inclusive approach when it comes to informal and 
formal employed or unemployed population, for the disabled, and for the elderly population. To fulfil the 
social distancing measures during the pandemic more than 500 government digital services were provided 
to citizens and more than 300 services to businesses. Digital identity enabled the authentication and 
access to these services. Services that benefitted the most from the possibility of digital identity 
authentication during the pandemic include pandemic social support applications and HES (HES (Hayat 
Eve Sığar – Life Fits Into Home) code generation and listing.  
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
In terms of lessons learned from their digital identity reforms, Turkey finds online education, remote working 
and e-commerce as inevitable technology infrastructures that force and promote the adoption of 
blockchain-based solutions into daily life. In line with this, Turkey is working on providing blockchain-based 
digital identity solutions in the future. 
United Kingdom 
1. National context  
GOV.UK Verify is a digital identity system operated by the public sector but delivered by private sector 
identity providers, and used for authentication purposes by public sector services. 
In the United Kingdom, all individuals above 18 years old can request a digital identity. The total population 
of the country in 2021 was 66.6 million, with the total population eligible for a digital identity (based on age) 
52.7 million, or 79% of the total population.   
2. Current national Digital Identity management system  
The country model 
The Government Digital Services (GDS) within the Cabinet Office steers the strategic vision for and 
direction of digital identity verification for public sector services. The Department for Digital, Culture, Media 
and Sports (DCMS) steers the strategic vision for digital identity verification when it comes to the private 
sector. GDS is in charge of delivering GOV.UK Verify which is the digital identity system for accessing 
public services. Identity Providers in the UK are funded privately.  
The Good Practice Guide 45 provides guidance to service providers on how to prove and verify someone’s 
identity - not limited to digital identity verification. The guidance aligns with the following international 
standards and regulations:  
• 
Digital ID and Authentication Council of Canada (DIACC) Pan Canadian Trust Framework Model 
• 
the EU electronic identification and trust services (eIDAS) regulation 
• 
ISO/IEC 29115 
• 
NIST 800-63 
In order to connect identification records across services, there is no single national identification number 
but various other mechanisms, including the national insurance number. Citizens can obtain a digital 
identity through GOV.UK Verify online. The process is: 
• 
Choose option to verify identity online 
• 
Choose identity provider 
• 
ID provider requests data to confirm identity 

76 |   
 © OECD 2021 
  
• 
If successful user returns to service for access 
Technical choices 
The means available to use for authentication through GOV.UK Verify are two-factor authentication that 
confirms access to a mobile phone number or an email account. There are no available figures on the 
number of authentications issued through these means.  
Portable (cross-platform, cross-sectoral, cross-border) digital identity 
• 
Cross-platform: GOV.UK Verify can be accessed through a mobile device, and is not device 
specific.  
• 
Cross-sectoral: GOV.UK Verify can only be used to access public sector services.  
• 
Cross-border: The UK does not recognize GOV.UK Verify. All EU countries that have notified 
under EU eIDAS Regulation can use their digital identity to access non-public sector services. 
Under the UK GDPR and adequacy determination would be required to assess the data protection 
and security approaches of another country before agreeing mutual recognition on digital identity. 
Data visibility and citizen consents 
The UK General Data Protection Regulation ensures the protection of privacy in digital identity systems 
and the legitimate and proportionate processing of a citizen’s identifiable data through digital identity 
systems.  
Citizens are proactively informed about the processing of their personal identifiable data through privacy 
notices via email. Users of GOV.UK Verify can access and see what attributes about them are being shared 
and re-used, and with whom, and they are also able to both provide and revoke consent. Furthermore, civil 
society organisations in the country are monitoring the process by which personable identifiable data are 
being shared and re-used. 
3. Uptake and adoption of Digital Identity  
The use of GOV.UK Verify for user authentication and verification is not mandatory for public sector 
organisations. There are no available figures on the update and adoption of GOV.UK Verify for service 
providers.  
In December 2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, the number of individuals with a digital 
identity was 5.6 million. The percentage of the eligible population that had a digital identity was therefore 
11%. In April 2021, a year after the first wave of the pandemic, the total population with an active access 
to a digital identity was 8.4 million, meaning the share of eligible population with a digital identity had 
increased by 5 percentage points to 16%.  
4. Ongoing and future Digital Identity reforms 
The United Kingdom’s Government's response to the Call for Evidence on Digital Identity on 01 September 
2020 committed to promoting an enabling market of digital identity standards. The Government published 
an alpha of the UK digital identity and attributes Trust Framework on Thursday 11 February 2021. The 
trust framework is a set of rules and standards which organisations agree to follow. If an organisation is 
part of the digital identity trust framework, then you will know they follow agreed requirements which 
safeguard data and protect privacy. The alpha contains rules on privacy and data protection, fraud 
management, security, and making sure products and services are inclusive. The trust framework is being 
published as an alpha (prototype) so that DCMS can test it with services, industries, organisations and 

77 |   
             
 © OECD 2021 
  
potential users. DCMS are taking this collaborative approach to make sure that when the final version is 
published it meets the needs of those who will rely on it. The next version of the trust framework alpha is 
due to be published in the summer. It will include information about the certification process by which 
organisations will be assessed to gain a Trustmark.  
DCMS is also preparing to consult on digital identity legislation during this year. This will include proposals 
for a governing body to own and manage the trust framework to build public and industry confidence in 
this new market. A priority for the United Kingdom is making sure that framework is aligned with the 
approach taken by other countries. There are clear benefits from achieving international interoperability, 
reducing fraud and trade frictions, and offering increased choice and security for individuals and 
businesses that want to prove identities across international borders. 
United States of America 
The United States government has a system of federated identities. Identities are generated at the local 
government level and used to create state government level identity credentials.  
At the federal government level, the United States government is working to recognize identities from the 
state and local levels to enable secure digital access to federal services while prioritizing privacy, 
minimizing data collection, and ensuring user consent before their data is used or shared. This includes 
firewalling to ensure that data is not shared with agencies who do not need access to the data to provide 
the service requested, as well as a user-friendly format that does not require data collection for the 
provision of services that do not require such data.  
The United States considers that the centralization of identity information brings with it inherent risk, 
particularly related to user privacy; whereas, federation enables easy and secure exchange of information 
between ecosystems. 
