European Interoperability Framework (EIF)
The
European Interoperability Framework (EIF)
, revised in
2017
, sets out principles and recommendations to guide public administrations in delivering interoperable digital services (a new revision is currently underway).
It is composed by:
Objectives:
▪️  Support European public administrations in the design and delivery of seamless cross-border European public services.
▪️  Provide support to Member States to design and update their national interoperability frameworks (NIFs), policies, etc.
▪️  Contribute to the establishment of the digital single market by fostering cross-border and cross-sectoral interoperability.
European Interoperability Framework in detail
1. Introduction
This first section provides an
overview
of the European Interoperability Framework, encompassing its
purpose
,
legal framework
and
scope
. Discover here how the EIF aims at enhancing interoperability of digital public services and at overcoming the challenges that could hinder progress towards the EU digital single market.
Go to Section 1
2. Underlying principles of European public services
In this section, you will find the
key interoperability principles
that are essential to create interoperable European public services. Specifically, the EIF is built on 12 principles, organised into four categories, each connected to specific recommendations.
Go to Section 2
3. Interoperability layers
This section highlights the importance of addressing interoperability across all its layers:
legal
,
organisational
,
semantic
and
technical
interoperability. These are all the aspects that should be considered when designing European public services.
Go to Section 3
4. The conceptual model for integrated public services provisions
The conceptual model presented in Section 4 provides a
common scheme
for designing European public services or for improving existing ones. Read how it applies to all levels of government, from local to EU-wide and is closely aligned with the interoperability principles.
Go to Section 4
5. Conclusions
Go through the conclusive remarks and tie together all the elements of the EIF.
Go to Section 5
Additional resources
Do you want to learn more about the latest version of the EIF? Have a look at these resources:
EIF full text
EIF Brochure
EIF leaflet
Previous versions of the EIF
To  know more about how the EIF evolved, consult the previous versions:
EIF 2010
Access
here
the full text of the second version of the EIF.
EIF 2004
Access
here
the full text of the first version of the EIF.
Specialised versions of the EIF
European Interoperability Framework for Smart Cities and Communities (EIFSCC)
The
European Interoperability Framework for Smart Cities and Communities
(EIF4SCC) was designed to support local governments in developing interoperable digital services and aims to provide
EU local administrations
with
definitions
,
principles
,
recommendations
,
practical use cases
drawn from cities and communities from around Europe and beyond, and a
common model to facilitate delivery of services
to the public across domains, cities, regions and borders.
More information and resources
European Higher Education Interoperability Framework (HEIF)
The
European Higher Education Interoperability Framework
(HEIF) addresses the need to develop seamless digital teaching and learning across Europe as part of the Digital Education Action Plan. This framework encompasses the full learning journey, reflecting a shared vision and a strong commitment from higher education and policy stakeholders to
harmonise digital processes
and
support Europe-wide student mobility
and virtual campuses between universities.
More information and resources
Report abusive content