Digital Identity Standards | ENISA
Digital Identity Standards
Back to all publications
Download
Publication date:
July 3, 2023
This report gives an overview of the most important standards and standardisation organisations in this area. This information is useful for the novice, to find out what is available, but also for more experienced readers who might not be aware of some (parts of) existing standards. It also provides an analysis of standards related to different means supporting digital identity. This covers means created and managed by trust services, electronic identification means and the EU Digital Identity Wallet.
Search related content with:
Digital Identity
Standardisation
Standards
Share this page
Publication details
Content written for
Private Sector
Publication type
ENISA Reports
Topics
Digital Identity and Data Protection
Language
EN
Related content
Publications
Events
News
Remote ID Proofing - Good practices
12 March, 2024
Through this report, ENISA aims to enhance stakeholder awareness, facilitate risk analysis in evolving threat landscapes, and bolster trustworthiness in remote identity proofing methods.
Engineering Personal Data Protection in EU Data Spaces
26 January, 2024
Common European data spaces (EU data spaces) are a novel concept introduced in the European strategy for data and elaborated further within the Data Governance Act (DGA).
Trust Services-Secure move to the cloud of the eIDAS ecosystem
12 June, 2023
This report includes a detailed analysis on the different technical requirements that must be addressed considering the relevant standards.
DNS Identity
24 May, 2023
This report provides a view of authentication and verification of domain name owners in the context of domain name registration.
BROWSE ALL PUBLICATIONS
Trust Services and eID Forum - CA Day 2026
2026
Sep 15
Engineering Data Protection in the wake of PQC
2025
Dec 8
Annual Privacy Forum (APF) 2025
2025
Oct 22
Trust Services and eID Forum - CA Day 2025
2025
Sep 24
BROWSE ALL EVENTS
ENISA advances the certification of EU Digital Wallets
News Item
03 April, 2026
ENISA launches a public consultation on the draft candidate EU Digital Wallet certification scheme, subsequent to the scheme’s development with the dedicated Ad Hoc Working Group.
Trust Services & Digital Wallets: Moving to the Cloud and Remote Identity Proofing
News Item
12 June, 2023
In order to address the cybersecurity questions of remote identity proofing, the European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) organised a workshop to support the area of Trust Services and Digital Wallets and published a report on moving trust servi
Securing Personal Data in the Wake of AI
News Item
01 June, 2023
This year’s Annual Privacy Forum focused on pressing personal data protection challenges raised by the ever faster-paced developments witnessed today in digital technologies and legislative initiatives.
Trust Service Forum 2022: Deepdive into Digital Identity Wallets and Web Certificates
News Item
09 November, 2022
The European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) gathered experts from trust services providers, standardisation bodies and national authorities around the discussion tables of the Trust Services Forum organised on 27 and 28 October in Berlin.
BROWSE ALL NEWS
Subscribe
Stay updated with ENISA!
Sign up for email alerts on publications, events, vacancies,
              and more.
Sign up now