GOV.UK Wallet technical documentation - Wallet technical documentation
Skip to main content
Table of contents
Search (via Google)
Search
GOV.UK Wallet technical documentation
GOV.UK Wallet lets users save and share digital versions of their government documents on their smartphone or device.
If you work in a central government department, you can use GOV.UK Wallet to
issue digital and verifiable versions of the physical documents you already issue
as part of your service.
You will be able to
consume credentials from GOV.UK Wallet
if you are a:
public sector organisation (such as central government, the NHS, or a local authority)
certified Digital Verification Services (DVS) provider on the
register of digital identity and attribute services
Issuing a document as a government service
Before you can issue credentials to GOV.UK Wallet, you must already be using
GOV.UK One Login
in your service to log in your users or verify their identities. You should discuss using GOV.UK Wallet with your GOV.UK One Login Engagement Manager, or
contact us
.
This documentation is for people such as developers and product managers on services that are already using GOV.UK One Login. The documentation will help you:
learn how to issue digitally verifiable credentials to GOV.UK Wallet as part of your service journey
understand
how GOV.UK Wallet works for credential issuers
prepare your service to use GOV.UK Wallet
understand
how organisations and individuals can receive and validate digital credentials you have issued
when the holder presents them
Verifying and consuming a document
You will be able to verify and consume credentials from GOV.UK Wallet if you are:
a public sector organisation (such as central government, the NHS, or a local authority)
a certified Digital Verification Services (DVS) provider on the
register of digital identity and attribute services
This documentation is for developers and service teams in public sector organisations or DVS providers. It can help you to:
understand
how GOV.UK wallet works for consuming credentials
understand the
credentials available in GOV.UK Wallet
We’ll update this documentation as new information and features become available.
Digital verification services should read the guidance about
using GOV.UK Wallet in the digital identity sector
to understand the different models available.
Documentation updates
These are the most recent changes to the GOV.UK Wallet technical documentation.
Publication date
Update
Sep 16 2026
Update the
Check a credential’s status
page to clarify how to check if a credential is valid or expired.
Sep 03 2026.
Add reference to ISO 8601 date time format in the
‘Use in-app credential refresh’ page
to clarify how to specify the
expectedUpdate
property for JWT-VC credentials.
Sep 01 2026
Add new
Testing your in-person verification service with the GOV.UK Wallet Sandbox
page to add guidance on the GOV.UK Wallet Sandbox. This includes information about using the document builder to issue and revoke a test digital driving licence, and using the mock Status List Service to check the status of a test digital driving licence.
Aug 26 2026
Update the
‘Use in-app credential refresh’ page
to change the time period for which in-app credential refresh tokens are valid. This period has changed from 15 months to 14 months.
Aug 19 2026
Restructure documentation for credential issuers and verifiers and add guidance on
checking a credential’s validity
.
Jul 23 2026
Remove guidance on publishing DID documents and managing keys for JWT credential issuance.
Jul 14 2026
Add new
‘Before you can verify credentials’
section to add guidance on working with GOV.UK Wallet’s
Certificate Authority
. Also includes information about
sending a Certificate Signing Request (CSR)
.
Jun 11 2026
Fix the
/notification
endpoint 401 response definition and remove invalid error code from 400 response in the
OpenAPI spec
.
Jun 11 2026
Update the
/.well-known/jwks.json
endpoint description, fix
alg
enum value, and correct example key encoding in the
OpenAPI spec
.
Jun 11 2026
Update the
/credential_offer
endpoint description and simplify the response example in the
OpenAPI spec
.
Jun 09 2026
Replace JWT credential content with mdoc credential content on the
metadata endpoint
page.
Jun 08 2026
Add guidance on idempotent requests to the
‘Issue a status list entry’ page
.
Jun 03 2026
Update the
credential exchange flow diagram
to remove DID document content and add certificate chain validation for mdoc-based credentials.
May 20 2026
Change
guidance on which credentials are supported
to make it clear that new issuers must use the mdoc format. Add warnings to help mdoc issuers identify where current guidance is specific to issuing JWTs before we complete the updates to this guidance.
May 18 2026
Update text in header from “GOV.UK Wallet technical documentation” to “About GOV.UK Wallet” to improve accessibility.
Apr 03 2026
Update the descriptions for steps 2 and 3 in the credential exchange flow sequence diagram.
Mar 20 2026
Add
expectedUpdate
property for JWT-VC credentials to the
‘Issue a credential’ page
.
Mar 13 2026
Restructure documentation into 3 tabs to help user navigation.
‘GOV.UK Wallet’
contains introductory information.
‘Issue credentials’
contains information on how to issue credentials for government departments.
‘Verify credentials’
contains information on how to verify credentials in GOV.UK Wallet.
Mar 04 2026
Restructure ‘
Refresh credentials
’ to add guidance on manual and in-app refresh methods. Add new page for
in-app refresh
. Add new page for
manual refresh
and move previous manual refresh content here.
Jan 23 2026
Add guidance on
verifying credentials in person
and the
mobile driving licence (mDL)
. Restructure the
‘Consuming and verifying credentials’
section to fit the new pages.
Jan 20 2026
Update the ‘
Refresh credentials
’ section to specify
credential_validity_period_max_days
and
credential_refresh_web_journey_url
as mandatory, and add to the schema.
Nov 13 2025
Add new ‘
Refresh credentials
’ section to add guidance on how to prompt users to refresh expired credentials. Add information about new
credential_refresh_web_journey_url
parameter to ‘
Metadata
’ page.
Oct 22 2025
Add new ‘
Use Status List Service to change credential status
’ section to add guidance on using the Status List Service. Includes information about the
/issue
and
/revoke
APIs, and guidance on
checking a credential’s status
.
Aug 19 2025
Clarify image file type, size, and EXIF data validations.
Aug 15 2025
Add new ‘
Use sample reference material
’ page to link to reference implementation and test harness resources.
Jul 10 2025
Add
exp
as a required claim in the GOV.UK One Login access token.
Jul 10 2025
Clarify requirements for date fields in JWT VC credentials: Remove Optional claims
exp
and
nbf
. Update guidance on credential expiration. Specify
validFrom
and
validUntil
must be expressed in ISO 8601 format with seconds. Update
validUntil
to be a Required claim.
Jul 03 2025
Remove
credentialSubject
,
display
and
key_attestations_required
parameters, and rename
cryptographic_suites_supported
to
credential_signing_alg_values_supported
in Metadata API.
Jul 02 2025
Update the second value for
@context
property in DID Document.
Jun 26 2025
Update guidance on credential photos.
Jun 19 2025
Update proof of possession
iat
claim description. Add
Cache-Control
with value of
no-store
to Notification and Credential APIs. Add 400 Bad Request response to Credential API.
May 29 2025
Add a 401 Unauthorized response to the Credential API.
May 28 2025
Update the Notification API 401 Unauthorized response format to comply with RFC 6750 (Bearer Token Usage).
May 14 2025
Add
Consuming and verifying credentials
section for credential consumer and verifier documentation. Update
GOV.UK Wallet
page with new introductory content for new section.
Apr 23 2025
Restructure ‘What GOV.UK Wallet does, and how it works’ into a ‘
GOV.UK Wallet
’ introductory page and a ‘
How GOV.UK Wallet works
’ page. Remove ‘Understand GOV.UK Wallet’s credential exchange flow’ page, and move issuance flow diagram and steps into the new ‘
How GOV.UK Wallet works
’ page.
Apr 16 2025
Begin recording changes in a changelog.
This page was last reviewed on 27 May 2026.

        It needs to be reviewed again on 27 November 2026
        by the page owner
#di-mobile-wallet-tech-docs
.
This page was set to be reviewed before 27 November 2026
       by the page owner
#di-mobile-wallet-tech-docs
.
      This might mean the content is out of date.