1  
 
 
 
 
 
DIACC-CP-05-01 Independent Review Committee Charter 
 
 
 
Version:  3.0 
 
Reference: DIACC-CP-05-01 
Date: 2024-02-27 
Status: Final  
 
Editor: Certification Program Management Office 
IPR: DIACC Intellectual Property Rights V1.0 

2  
1. Purpose and Mandate 
 
This Charter establishes the DIACC Certification Program Independent Review Committee (IRC) 
based on ISO standards and industry best practices. 
2. Overview 
The IRC has delegated authority from the DIACC Board of Directors (BOD) to review Audit 
Reports for quality assurance, as specified in the applicable Certification Program guidance and 
process documents. 
 
3. Composition 
IRC representatives are nominated by DIACC top management and Certification Program 
leadership and appointed by the DIACC BOD. IRC members may include subject matter 
experts from the information security management, audit, cybersecurity, digital identity, and 
standardization domains. 
 
4. Leadership 
 
The IRC shall have a Chair and, ideally, a Vice Chair. The Chair shall serve for a one-year 
term. There is no limit to the number of terms an individual may serve. If an IRC leadership 
seat becomes vacant, the IRC shall designate an interim Chair. 
 
5. Responsibilities 
 
The IRC is responsible for: 
a. Accept terms and conditions stipulated by the IRC member agreement, including: 
o Perform its role in an impartial and confidential manner and comply with the 
applicable NDA. 
o Disclosure of Conflict of Interest and duty to abstain. 
b. Conducting a quality review of the audit findings reported by the DIACC-accredited 
auditor.  
 
6. Resources and Support 
The IRC requires: 
a. Collaboration with the DIACC top management and Certification Program staff to support 
the program. 
b. Development and maintenance of contracts and agreements. 
c. Secure information management system. 
d. Program management to act as secretariat.  
 
The Certification Program Management Office provides support to the IRC.  
 
7. Compensation 
Participation is on a volunteer basis, and representatives are not reimbursed for any costs that 
may result from IRC activities. 
3  
 
8. Quorum 
a. Quorum shall be the participation of at least 50% of the non-recused IRC members. 
b. Quorum required for IRC decisions, including: 
(i) Decisions to affirm that quality assurance is appropriately performed. 
(iii) Quorum shall be the participation of at least 50% of the non-recused IRC 
members. 
(iv)  Decisions require an ordinary resolution with at least 50% +1 votes recorded in 
favour for a motion to carry. 
 
9. Performance Indicators 
Performance indicators to measure IRC success include: 
a. Demand and acceptance of the certification. 
b. Timely resolution of issues. 
 
 
10. Liaison Officers 
 
10.1 Trust Framework Expert Committee (TFEC): 
a. The DIACC Trust Framework Expert Committee (TFEC) should appoint two 
representatives to serve as Technical Liaison Officers to the IRC. 
b. The purpose of the TFEC Technical Liaison Officers is to connect the IRC with 
appropriate sources of technical advice on specific matters pertinent to the DIACC 
PCTF. 
c. The TFEC Technical Liaison Officers should be able to assist the IRC with questions or 
requests for clarification regarding implementation of DIACC PCTF conformance criteria. 
d. The IRC will confer with the TFEC Technical Liaison Officers as needed and may invite 
them to ad-hoc meetings. 
e. The discussions with the IRC will be strictly related to the DIACC PCTF conformance 
criteria implementation. 
f. The TFEC Technical Liaison Officers will not have access to applicant submissions 
due to confidentiality reasons. Only the IRC members and Certification Program staff 
subject to the NDA and conflict of interest policies will have access to the applicant 
submissions and related information. 
 
10.2 Other Technical Bodies 
The IRC may require technical guidance from other technical bodies when other schemes or 
frameworks are added to the Certification Program. Other potential liaisons shall be invited 
based on approval by the DIACC Board of Directors. 
4 
 
 
11. Reference Documents 
a. Independent Review Committee Member Agreement. 
b. DIACC-CP-02-01 Certification process of services. 
c. DIACC-CP-03-01 Guidance for audits of services against PCTF. 
d. DIACC-CP-06-01Certification Program Manual. 
e. DIACC-CP-07-01 Quality Management Process.  
f. ISO/IEC 17021 Conformity assessment —Requirements for bodies providing audit and 
certification of management systems. 
g. ISO/IEC 19011 Guidelines for auditing management systems. 
h. ISO/IEC 27006 Information technology — Security techniques — Requirements for 
bodies providing audit and certification of information security management systems. 
i. ISO/IEC 29115 Information technology — Security techniques — Entity authentication 
assurance framework. 
j. ISO/IEC 17065:2012 “Conformity assessment – Requirements for bodies certifying 
products, processes and services”. 
k. ISO/IEC 17020:2012 “Conformity assessment — Requirements for the operation of 
various types of bodies performing” inspection”. 
l. ISO/IEC 17025:2017 “General requirements for the competence of testing and 
calibration laboratories”. 
m. ISO/IEC 17030:2021 “Conformity assessment — General requirements for third-party 
marks of conformity”. 
n. NIST 800-63-3 Conformance Criteria (63A, 63B and 63C). 
o. DIACC PCTF Components. 
p. Other documents that the Certification Program Management Office and DIACC top management 
may identify.  
 
 
Note: DIACC PCTF Assessment Component (DIACC PCTF09) was deprecated. 
 
 
Revision History 
 
 
Release Date Version Changes Status 
2024-02-27 3.0 Further alignment with 
ISO 17065 
Approved by 
DIACC 
Board of 
Directors on 
2024-04-09 
2022-11-21 2.0 Scope 
Duties and alignment 
of language with the 
rest of the document 
suite. 
Approved by 
DIACC 
Board of 
Directors on 
2023-02-02 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions 
 
Term Meaning 
Audit Evaluation, assessment, and examination by 
a DIACC-accredited Auditor to determine 
conformity against the applicable PCTF 
Component conformance criteria.  
 
Audit Report Report provided by the DIACC-accredited 
Auditor, which informs conformity in relation 
to the applicable DIACC PCTF Component 
conformance criteria. 
Auditor DIACC- accredited Auditor that conducts 
third-party evaluation against the PCTF 
Components. 
DIACC PCTF Components DIACC Pan-Canadian Trust 
Framework Components are available 
at https://diacc.ca/trust-framework/ 
Certification Program  A third-party conformity assessment 
program designed around ISO/IEC 
17065 and 17021 to determine 
compliance with the PCTF and 
indicate that specific requirements are 
met. 
 
2022-02-28 1.7 New document Approved by 
DIACC Board 
of Directors on 
2022- 
03-08 