  
 
1 
 
 
Notification form for electronic identity 
scheme under Article 9(5) of Regulation (EU) 
No 910/2014 
The Kingdom of Sweden hereby notifies the European Commission of an electronic identification 
scheme to be published in the list referred to in Article 9(3) of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 and 
confirms the following:  
 the information communicated in this notification is consistent with the information which 
has been communicated to the Cooperation Network in accordance with Article 7(g) of 
Regulation (EU) No 910/2014, and  
 the electronic identification scheme can be used to access at least one service (several 
hundreds) provided by a public sector body in The Kingdom of Sweden.  
2020-12-14 
Anna Eriksson 
Director General, Agency for Digital Government 
  
2020-12-14 
 Diarienummer: 2020-1972 
 
 
  
 
2 
 
 
1 General information 
Title of scheme  Levels of assurance (low, substantial or high) 
Swedish eID (Svensk e-legitimation) Substantial and High 
2 Authority responsible for the scheme 
Name of the authority  Postal address E-mail address Telephone No.     
Agency for Digital 
Government  
Storgatan 37 
852 30 Sundsvall 
Sweden 
e-legitimation@digg.se +46 77 111 44 00 
 
The Agency for Digital Government (DIGG) is an agency under the Swedish Government, appointed 
as responsible for the Swedish eID scheme Svensk e-legitimation and the notification process for the 
scheme according to Article 9 of Regulation No 910/2014 (eIDAS). 
3 Information on relevant parties, entities and bodies 
(where there are multiple parties, entities or bodies, 
please list them all, in accordance with Article 3(2) and 
(3) 
3.1 Entity which manages the registration process of the unique person identification 
data 
Name of entity which manages the registration process of the unique person identification data  
The Swedish Tax Agency is responsible for the population register and the registration of residents 
living in Sweden. This register is used as the basis for the registration for an electronic identification 
means. 
3.2 Party issuing the electronic identification means 
Name of the party issuing the electronic identity means and indication of whether the party is referred to in 
Article 7(a)(i), (ii) or (iii) of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 
Electronic identification means are issued by independent entities (“Issuers of eID means”) according 
to Article 7(a)(iii) in compliance with the requirements of the Swedish Trust Framework. The 
electronic identification means included in the notification are: 
 BankID, issued by Finansiell ID-teknik BID AB (“BID”) 
 Freja eID+, issued by Freja eID Group AB (publ) (Freja) 
 EFOS, issued by The Swedish Social Insurance Agency 
  
 
3 
 
3.3 Party operating the authentication procedure 
Name of party operating the authentication procedure 
The Issuers of the eID means are responsible for operating their respective authentication procedure. 
3.4 Supervisory body 
Name of supervisory body 
The Agency for Digital Government supervises the eID scheme, manages the Swedish Trust 
Framework and audits the Issuers of eID means. 
4 Description of the electronic identification scheme 
Document(s) may be enclosed for each of the following descriptions. 
(a) Briefly describe the scheme including the context within which it operates and its scope 
The core of the Swedish eID scheme (Svensk e-legitimation) consists of 
A legal framework: 
• Ordinance (2018:1486) with instructions for the Agency for Digital Government 
• Act (2016:561) on complementary provisions to the eIDAS regulation 
• Act (2013: 311) on system of freedom of choice with regard to services for electronic 
identification 
• Population Registration Act (1991:481) 
A contractual agreement structure: 
• A framework services agreement 
• The Swedish Trust Framework 
A supervisory regime: 
• Audit and supervision process of Issuers of eID means 
• The Swedish eID trust mark 
A technical infrastructure: 
• The Sweden Connect identity federation 
• The eIDAS node (Proxy Service) 
 
Together these components create an open ecosystem for Issuers of eID means. All issuers who pass 
the agency’s audit have the right to enter into the contractual arrangement with the agency, and to 
provide electronic identification to the public sector. New Issuers of eID means who enter into the 
market can join the scheme successively. If they are active on the national level and approved for the 
trust mark they can also apply to be included in the scope of the Swedish eID scheme notification. 
Swedish eIDs issued at assurance levels 3 and 4 as defined in the Swedish Trust Framework comply 
with the requirements of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1502 for ‘Substantial’ and 
‘High’ respectively. 
  
 
4 
 
(b) Where applicable, list the additional attributes which may be provided for natural persons under the 
scheme if requested by a relying party 
Not applicable. Sweden only includes mandatory attributes in assertions. 
(c) Where applicable, list the additional attributes which may be provided for legal persons under the scheme 
if requested by a relying party 
Not applicable.  
4.1 Applicable supervisory, liability and management regime 
4.1.1 Applicable supervisory regime 
Describe the supervisory regime of the scheme with respect to the following:   
(where applicable, information shall include the roles, responsibilities and powers of the supervising body 
referred to in point 3.4, and the entity to which it reports. If the supervising body does not report to the 
authority responsible for the scheme, full details of the entity to which it reports shall be provided). 
(a) supervisory regime applicable to the party issuing the electronic identification means 
The Agency for Digital Government is the supervisory authority for Issuers of eID means. The Agency 
for Digital Government is a state authority which reports to the Government, where the Ministry of 
Infrastructure acts as the point of contact. 
The agency ensures that only issuers that have successfully completed their audit, entered into a 
contractual agreement with the agency and passed the appropriate technical tests are allowed to be 
used in a cross-border context. 
This agreement also regulates responsibilities in event of an incident and a suspension of an eID 
mean. 
(b) supervisory regime applicable to the party operating the authentication procedure 
The same supervisory regime as described in 4.1.1(a) applies. 
4.1.2 Applicable liability regime 
Describe briefly the applicable national liability regime for the following scenarios: 
(a) liability of the Member State under Article 11(1) of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 
There is no specific national liability regime for the implementation of eIDAS in Swedish law, the 
liability provisions of the eIDAS Regulation thus becomes directly applicable. As a result, the Kingdom 
of Sweden is responsible for damages caused deliberately or by negligence for the non-fulfillment of 
the obligations under (d) and (f) of Article 7 in a cross-border transaction. 
According to Swedish tort law, liability for damages can also exist if a number of legal criteria are 
met. It is not possible in general terms to indicate in what situations such liability may arise. 
(b) liability of the party issuing the electronic identification means under Article 11(2) of Regulation (EU) No 
910/2014 
The issuer is liable for damage caused intentionally or negligently by failure to attribute the eID 
means to its rightful holder in accordance with the technical specifications, standards and procedures 
  
 
5 
 
set out through the eIDAS Regulation for the relevant assurance level as notified by the Kingdom of 
Sweden. 
All participants of the Sweden Connect identity federation are responsible for their own actions. 
Liability in cases of negligence is subject to the general provisions of Swedish tort law. Such liability 
may in certain circumstances be limited in the agreements concluded between the parties. Liability 
for damages in non-contractual relations may also exist if a number of legal criteria are met.  
However, all parties are still bound by the general provisions of Swedish and European law, including 
the provisions of the eIDAS Regulation.  
(c) liability of the party operating the authentication procedure under Article 11(3) of Regulation (EU) No 
910/2014 
The Issuers of the eID means are responsible for operating their respective authentication procedure 
and liable for damage as described in (b). 
4.1.3 Applicable management arrangements 
Describe the arrangements for suspending or revoking of either the entire identification scheme or 
authentication, or their compromised parts. 
Through the contractual arrangements, the Agency for Digital Government has the ability to 
temporarily suspend or permanently terminate the use an eID means or an Issuer of eID means, both 
nationally and in the cross-border context, on the grounds that an issuer has failed to comply with 
the contractual obligations. 
Both the Issuer of an eID means and the Agency for Digital Government may also suspend or 
permanently terminate the use of an eID mean on the grounds that there is an ongoing security 
incident which may have a material impact on relying parties. 
An Issuer of eID means may also on its own initiative terminate the contract with the agency, in 
which case the use of the eID means will be terminated as well. 
4.2 Description of the scheme components 
Describe how the following elements of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1502 (1) have been 
met in order to reach a level of assurance of an electronic identification means under the scheme the 
Commission is being notified of:   
The document LoA Mapping – the Swedish Trust Framework provides a detailed analysis on the 
conformity of the Swedish Trust Framework with the eIDAS implementing Regulation (EU) 
2015/1502. To support the enforcement of the Trust Framework within the Swedish eID scheme, a 
number of components acts together: 
The Agency for Digital Government 
Under the ordinance (2018:1486), the Agency for Digital Government manages the Swedish Trust 
Framework and performs audits of Issuers of eID means based on its provisions. 
The agency is also responsible for the development, operation and management of the Swedish 
identity federation Sweden Connect, the Swedish eIDAS-node and to be the Single Point of Contact. 
Act (2016:561), on complementary provisions to the eIDAS Regulation, makes the agency responsible 
for the notification of the Swedish eID scheme to the Commission. 
  
 
6 
 
The agency represents Sweden in the eIDAS Cooperation Network and other international forums on 
a personal appointment from the government cabinet office. 
The Swedish Population Register 
As set out in the Population Registration Act (1991:481), The Swedish Tax Agency is responsible for 
the civil registry of Sweden. Persons permanently living in Sweden are registered in the population 
register with a unique identifier (Swedish personal identity number). Normally a person keeps this 
identifier their whole life, only under very rare conditions can a someone change their personal 
identity number. Persons not permanently living in Sweden receive a unique co-ordination number. 
More details on the Swedish population register and the personal identity number is provided in the 
Swedish System for Population Registration document. 
The Swedish Trust Framework  
The Swedish Trust Framework has a role similar to the eIDAS implementing Regulation (EU) 
2015/1502 in setting out minimum technical specifications and procedures for assurance levels. In 
some aspects the Swedish Trust Framework has more stringent requirements for each of the 
assurance levels than the corresponding eIDAS assurance levels. The intent is however to notify the 
Swedish assurance level 3 as ‘substantial’ and level 4 as ‘high’. 
Much like the eIDAS implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1502, the Swedish Trust Framework defines 
outcome-based provisions rather than normative requirements of specific controls. Even though the 
trust framework is not completely free of normative elements, it is still technology neutral. This 
allows the trust framework to stand the test of time and avoids locking into what was appropriate at 
the time of writing, permitting adaptation as both technology and threats develops.  
Sweden does not issue eID means to legal persons, nor provides bindings between natural persons 
and legal persons, partly because it is not clear how mandates to represent a legal entity could be 
expressed by the attributes described for cross-border use. 
The audit and supervision process 
The Agency of Digital Government performs audits based on the trust framework with the assistance 
of auditors contracted directly by the agency. The auditors have the ability to determine control 
equivalency based on the guidance provided by the agency. As a result, an Issuer of eID means is 
given the opportunity to develop new technologies and procedures, and have this evaluated to the 
outcome-based provisions of the trust framework. 
The audit and supervision of Issuers of eID means are described in detail in the enclosed White 
Paper. 
  
  
 
7 
 
The agreement structure and the Swedish eID trust mark 
Any Issuer of eID means who have undergone the agency’s audit with successful result may sign a 
license agreement which grants use of the Swedish eID trust mark in relation to the provided 
services.  
 
 
FIGURE 1: THE SWEDISH EID TRUST MARK 
The Swedish Trust Framework is part of the license agreement, and the Issuers of eID means agrees 
to comply with these provisions throughout the term of the agreement. The license agreement is a 
pre-requisite to both provide authentication services to the public sector as well as to be included in 
the notification of the Swedish eID scheme. 
The agency has the right to terminate the license agreement if the Issuer of eID means does not 
comply with all of the provisions of the agreement. If this happen then all other agreements for the 
provisioning of eID services (such as the one for cross-border use of eID means) also will terminate. 
The identity federation Sweden Connect 
Sweden Connect is the brand for the Swedish identity federation used to connect Identity Providers 
(IdP) to relying Service Providers. The Swedish eIDAS Proxy Service acts as one such Service Provider 
in connection to the Swedish IdPs.  
The authentication function used for cross-border authentication is provided by the respective IdP of 
the Issuer of the eID means. The Agency for Digital Government has defined an interoperability 
framework on the national level called Sweden Connect Technical Framework. Before any IdP is 
allowed to connect to the identity federation, it has to undergo a technical conformance assessment 
based on these technical specifications.  
Issuers of eID means 
Each Issuer of eID means can apply with one or more types of eID means, but must show compliance 
with the requirements of the Swedish Trust Framework for each of them.  
The Issuer of eID means is contractually obliged to comply with the requirements of the licence 
agreement, and is liable for damages if they are negligent in their duties. 
How each of the eID means included in the notification fulfils the requirements of the Swedish Trust 
Framework and the Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1502 is described in detail in 
the LoA Mapping document and its annexes. 

  
 
8 
 
4.2.1 Enrolment 
(a) Application and registration 
A Swedish eID may be issued only at the request of the applicant, and only after the applicant is 
made aware of the conditions under which the issuance occurs and what responsibility will lie with 
the applicant. 
An application for a Swedish eID shall be associated with a personal identity number or a verified co-
ordination number, and all other information otherwise necessary for the issuer to be able to provide 
the eID. 
Further details on application and registration are provided in the LoA Mapping document. 
(b) Identity proofing and verification (natural person) 
Issuers of eID means shall verify that the information provided in an application for eID is complete 
and consistent with the personal data registered in an official register. 
Issuers of eID means shall verify the applicant's identity in-person, in an equivalent manner as for the 
issuance of a recognised photo ID document. In addition, Issuers of eID means at assurance level 
‘substantial’ may also verify the applicant’s identity remotely, using another Swedish eID or by other 
reliable means that provides an equivalent degree of security in the proofing process. 
Further details on identity proofing and verification are provided in the LoA Mapping document. 
(c) Identity proofing and verification (legal person) 
Not applicable. 
(d) Binding between the electronic identification means of natural and legal persons 
Not applicable. 
4.2.2 Electronic identification means management 
(a) Electronic identification means characteristics and design (including, where appropriate, information on 
security certification) 
Means for electronic identification must always utilise two different authentication factors, where 
the first factor consists of a token of electronically stored information that the user shall 
demonstrate control of. The token is required to provide protection from duplication and tampering 
on a level which is commensurate to the risks associated with the assurance level (‘substantial’ or 
‘high’). For assurance level ‘high’ a hardware token must be used. 
Further details on electronic identification means characteristics and design are provided in the LoA 
Mapping document. 
(b) Issuance, delivery and activation 
Issuers of eID means shall provide the authentication token in-person to the applicant upon 
completion of identity verification while providing the personal code which the user should use to 
activate the token, separately and independently from the token and based on the contact details 
recorded in the official register or other information of the same degree of credibility. 
  
 
9 
 
Additionally, Issuers of Swedish eID at assurance level ‘substantial’ may provide the token remotely, 
through the same channel in which the applicant was identified in the proofing process. 
Further details on issuance, delivery and activation are provided in the LoA Mapping document. 
(c) Suspension, revocation and reactivation 
Issuers of eID means shall provide a revocation service with adequate availability. Revocation 
requests shall be processed promptly and in a secure manner whilst also having controls in place to 
prevent systematic abuse of the revocation service. 
Further details on suspension, revocation and reactivation are provided in the LoA Mapping 
document. 
(d) Renewal and replacement 
The Swedish Trust Framework requires that any renewal or replacement of an eID must follow the 
same procedures as initial issuance. 
Further details on renewal and replacement are provided in the LoA Mapping document. 
4.2.3 Authentication 
Describe the authentication mechanism including terms of access to authentication by relying parties other 
than public sector bodies. 
Issuers of eID means must ensure that technical security controls are implemented when verifying an 
electronic identity, so that it is highly unlikely that outsiders can compromise the protection 
mechanisms by guessing, eavesdropping, replaying or manipulating the communication channels. All 
cryptographic protocols used are required to use strong cipher suites and be based on proven 
primitives in trustworthy implementations, regardless of the assurance level. 
The provisions governing the infrastructure of Swedish eID does not distinguish between public 
sector bodies and other relying parties. It is at the discretion of the party operating the 
authentication procedure to accept or reject any authentication request received by entities other 
than public sector bodies. 
Further details on authentication are provided in the LoA Mapping document. 
4.2.4 Management and organisation 
Describe the management and organisation of the following aspects:  
(a) General provisions on management and organisation 
Issuers of eID means are registered legal entities, already established at the national level and fully 
operational. They are liable for all commitments that follow from the contractual agreements, 
regardless whether a specific commitment is carried out by the issuer itself or if it has been 
outsourced. 
Further details on general provisions on management and organisation are provided in the LoA 
Mapping document. 
  
 
10 
 
(b) Published notices and user information 
The Issuer of eID means is obliged to make the terms and conditions for the use of the provided 
services available to the applicant. These terms and conditions are required to include the user's 
obligation to protect their electronic identity, the issuer's obligations and responsibilities, service 
levels and any other guarantees made. 
Further details on published notices and user information are provided in the LoA Mapping 
document. 
(c) Information security management 
Issuers of eID means must have an information security management system (ISMS) based on 
ISO/IEC 27001 or equivalent principles for the management and control of information security.  
Further details on information security management are provided in the LoA Mapping document. 
(d) Record keeping 
Issuers of eID means shall retain records for at least ten years (in accordance with the general rules 
on limitation of claims for damages), unless destruction is required to preserve the rights of data 
subjects or supported by law or other regulations. Issuers shall have procedures in place to ensure 
that only specifically authorised staff have access to the records.  
These records include application forms and documents relating to the provision, acceptance and 
revocation of eIDs, agreements, policy documents and service definitions, log records, 
documentation and other evidence demonstrating compliance with the requirements.   
Further details on record keeping are provided in the LoA Mapping document. 
(e) Facilities and staff 
Issuers of eID means shall have established programs for background checking, aptitude testing and 
training. Segregation of duties shall be applied throughout the chain of issuing and providing of the 
eID means to the user. 
Further details on facilities and staff are provided in the LoA Mapping document. 
(f) Technical controls 
Technical controls shall be implemented to manage the risks associated with the services. These shall 
be evaluated on a regular basis, improved as new technology becomes available, and as result of an 
ongoing risk assessment. 
Further details on technical controls are provided in the LoA Mapping document. 
(g) Compliance and audit 
Issuers of eID means shall have an internal audit process where an independent auditor reviews the 
compliance with all requirements of the Swedish Trust Framework. The annual audit report shall be 
provided to the Agency for Digital Government. The agency has in turn the right to conduct 
additional assessments, as to verify that the internal auditor’s conclusions are correct. 
Further details on compliance and audit are provided in the LoA Mapping document. 
  
 
11 
 
4.3 Interoperability requirements 
Describe how the interoperability and minimum technical and operational security requirements under 
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1501 (2) are met. List and attach any document that may 
give further information on compliance, such as the opinion of the Cooperation Network, external audits, etc. 
The Swedish eID Scheme meets the interoperability and technical and operational security 
requirements as described in the document Sweden Connect eIDAS interoperability framework 
mapping. 
The Swedish eIDAS Proxy Service is based on custom development and is fully compliant with the 
eIDAS technical specifications, including crypto and operational security aspects. 
1. The Swedish eIDAS Proxy Service is able to connect with other Member States in both the test 
environment and in production, and are fully integrated and operational. 
2. The Swedish eIDAS Proxy Service is developed according to approved eIDAS technical 
requirements and does not impose costs or additional issues for other Member States. 
The Swedish eIDAS Proxy Service does not store any personal data, except for the purposes specified 
in Article 9(3). 
The Swedish eID scheme is used exclusively for the identification of natural persons. 
4.4 Supporting documents 
List here all supporting documentation submitted and state to which of the elements above they relate. 
Include any domestic legislation which relates to the electronic identification provision relevant to this 
notification. Submit an English version or English translation whenever available 
• Appendix 1: White paper – Introduction to the Swedish eID scheme 
• Appendix 2: LoA Mapping – The Swedish Trust Framework  
• Appendix 3: The Swedish system for population registration 
• Appendix 4: The Swedish eIDAS Interoperability Framework mapping 
 