SoK: Trusting Self-Sovereign Identity
Evan Krul
University of New South Wales
Cyber Security Cooperative Research Centre
Sydney, NSW, Australia
e.krul@unsw.edu.au
Hye-young Paik
University of New South Wales
Sydney, NSW, Australia
h.paik@unsw.edu.au
Sushmita Ruj
University of New South Wales
Sydney, NSW, Australia
sushmita.ruj@unsw.edu.au
Salil S. Kanhere
University of New South Wales
Sydney, NSW, Australia
salil.kanhere@unsw.edu.au
ABSTRACT
Digital identity is evolving from centralized systems to a decentral-
ized approach known as Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI). SSI empowers
individuals to control their digital identities, eliminating reliance on
third-party data custodians and reducing the risk of data breaches.
However, the concept of trust in SSI remains complex and frag-
mented. This paper systematically analyzes trust in SSI in light of
its components and threats posed by various actors in the system.
As a result, we derive three distinct trust models that capture the
threats and mitigations identified across SSI literature and imple-
mentations. Our work provides a foundational framework for future
SSI research and development, including a comprehensive catalogue
of SSI components and design requirements for trust, shortcomings
in existing SSI systems and areas for further exploration.
KEYWORDS
digital identity, self-sovereign identity, identity data privacy
1
INTRODUCTION
Digital identity encompasses not only usernames and passwords
but also our online presentation, interactions with others, and how
the world perceives us [5]. In 2023, Louisiana passed a law requir-
ing all websites containing adult content to verify the user’s age.
Louisiana’s law mandated users present their state-issued digital
identities, such as driver’s licenses, to access these websites [39].
This is not a singular event; digital identities are becoming ubiqui-
tous tools in many applications, including age verification, know-
your-customer compliance [121, 127], and academic credential ver-
ification [146]. Digital identity has expanded beyond mere name
and email addresses in an online account.
In the current ecosystem, digital identity is managed centrally
through siloed (one identity per service) or federated (single sign-on)
identity systems [129]. These centralized identity management sys-
tems typically rely on a single entity, such as a government agency
or a private entity, to issue and manage identities. This concentra-
tion of power has created a single point of failure, making these
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3), 1–17
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use. Not
for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in Proceedings of
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies, https://doi.org/10.56553/popets-2024-
0079.
systems susceptible to data breaches and misuse. In recent years,
there have been numerous high-profile breaches that highlight the
inherent risks of centralized identity management [21, 23, 58, 118].
Furthermore, the reliance on centralized authorities has placed
undue trust on these data custodians. Users are forced to relinquish
control over their personal identity information, with limited trans-
parency and accountability regarding how their data is used. This
lack of control raises concerns about potential privacy violations,
misuse of identity data, and the possibility of the central author-
ity gaining access to sensitive information about the usage of an
identity [73, 131].
In response to these concerns, a new identity paradigm has
emerged: Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI), aiming to revolutionize iden-
tity management by empowering individuals to take control of their
digital identity in the absence of a centralized authority [5]. The
essence of SSI lies in the issuance and verification of user credentials.
These credentials, issued by trusted entities, attest to the authen-
ticity of a particular attribute of a user’s identity. By holding the
credentials, users eliminate reliance on third-party data custodi-
ans, reduce the potential for data breaches, and ensure they retain
control over their identity.
While SSI bears the same underlying principle of fostering trust
between unknown parties as previous systems [29], the extent
of what “trust” means in this context has undergone considerable
discussion. In both conceptual and implementation level discussions
of SSI, there are disagreements on what trust is already available
between participants and what trust needs to be built up through
the design of the system [10, 72]. The discussions and summaries
in this paper will illustrate how complex and fragmented the field
of SSI has become. Without a clear agreement on the threats the
participants face, there can be no guidance on what SSI must address
in its design and requirements.
The paper aims to systematically analyze the elements of SSI in
light of trust requirements and assumptions. We do this by breaking
down SSI into its individual components to understand the under-
lying trust assumptions (or alternatively threats) that motivated
their design requirements. This analysis provides insights into the
design of an SSI system and identifies areas for further research
and development. A detailed description of the data collection and
analysis process is included in Appendix A.
1
arXiv:2404.06729v2  [cs.CR]  27 Jun 2024

Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
Krul et al.
1.1
Contributions
We claim the following three major contributions:
(1) A comprehensive analysis of trust in SSI, introducing three
distinct trust models to capture the varied levels of assumed
trust across literature and implementations. These models
are built by identifying the components of SSI and the threats
they face from various actors in the system.
(2) An analysis of known implementations of SSI, both in aca-
demic literature and industry products, detailing their trust
assumptions made and the implementation approaches taken
to address the assumed threats identified in (1).
(3) A foundational framework for future SSI research and de-
velopment by providing a comprehensive catalogue of SSI
components and design requirements according to trust mod-
els. We identify shortcomings in existing SSI systems and
highlight areas for further exploration.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 1.2
provides an overview of related work. Section 1.3 introduces the
core concepts of SSI, laying the foundation for subsequent discus-
sions. Section 2 uses these core concepts to establish a minimal
trust model for SSI, highlighting the design requirements necessary
to mitigate associated threats. Section 3 delves into the threats that
issuers, identity owners, and service providers face, extending be-
yond the minimal trust model. Section 4 consolidates these threats
into two additional threat models. Section 5 evaluates the state-
of-the-art academic literature and industry implementations, and
Section 6 concludes with a discussion of open research directions.
1.2
Related Work
We situate our work within the landscape of well-established sur-
veys on SSI and closely related topics. Through six categoriza-
tions, we differentiate our contribution from existing literature and
present a summary in Table 1.
Academic Literature and Industry Implementations; We
present a comprehensive analysis of both academic literature and
industry implementations. There have been several surveys that
collect and analyze academic literature on SSI. Soltani et al. [131]
performed a thorough survey and provided a detailed and in-depth
survey of SSI. They provided compelling motivation for SSI and
then introduced core components with a strong focus on academic
literature, briefly considering a subset of industry implementa-
tions. Schardong and Custódio [126] extensively covered publish-
ing venues and provided a taxonomy of academic literature. Zhu
and Badr [154] described a sub-set of academic and industry contri-
butions focused on blockchain identity for the internet-of-things.
Mühle et al. [108] did not consider any industry contributions,
only surveying academic contributions. Ernstberger et al. [51]
and Bistarelli et al. [17] both broadly collected DID methods from
academia and industry. Lim et al. [95] and Satybaldy et al. [123]
evaluated a sub-set of industry blockchain identity systems. Grüner
et al. [65] only evaluated a single industry implementation.
Catalogue of Components; This work presents a catalogue of
components of SSI and their design requirements. Schardong and
Custódio [126] independently collected a large catalogue, while Ern-
stberger et al. [51] presented a limited catalogue.
Threats and Trust Assumptions; A key focus of our contri-
bution is trust in SSI and the associated threats. Hardman [70]
presented the most complete SSI threat model focused on prevent-
ing credential fraud. Grüner et al. [65] provided a threat model for
a single implementation, while Ernstberger et al. [51] had limited
discussion on threats faced. Lim et al. [95] introduced a trust model
for blockchain implementations.
Foundation Framework; Satybaldy et al. [123] is the only
contribution presenting a framework to evaluate future work. They
evaluated five SSI constructions with a framework inspired by [5].
Not Limited to Blockchain Identity; A key distinction with
our contribution is that we do not present a survey focused on
blockchain-based SSI contributions. Schardong and Custódio [126]
were the only other work not to have a scope limited to blockchain
identities.
Table 1: Related Works Comparison
Our Work
Grüner et al. [65]
Soltani et al. [131]
Satybaldy et al. [123]
Zhu and Badr [154]
Mühle et al. [108]
Schardong and Custódio [126]
Lim et al. [95]
Ernstberger et al. [51]
Hardman [70]
Bistarelli et al. [17]
Academic Literature
Industry Implementations
Catalogue of Components
Threats and Trust Assumptions
Foundational Framework
Not Limited to Blockchain Identity
included
partially included
omitted
Although not a survey, the closest work to ours is Hardman [70]
who introduced a credential fraud threat model in a blockchain-
based Aries RFC. Our review of existing SSI surveys identified a
lack of consensus on SSI components and their underlying design
motivations. No existing work provides a comprehensive catalogue
of SSI components, an in-depth analysis of trust assumptions, and
an extensive collection of academic literature and industry imple-
mentations presented in this paper. Consequently, no existing work
serves as a sufficient foundational framework for future research.
1.3
Overview of SSI and Terminology
Issuer
Trust
Service Provider
Identity Owner
Verifiable
Credential
Verifiable
Presentation
Figure 1: SSI Credential Exchange
Self-sovereign identity (SSI) is founded on the issuance, storage,
and presentation of identity credentials [56, 57]. Three distinct roles
are involved in SSI:
Identity Owners require identification and collect credentials that
represent their identities.
Issuers are authorized entities that issue credentials to identity
owners (government registries issuing driver’s licenses).
Service Providers request credentials from identity owners to
verify their identities.
2

SoK: Trusting Self-Sovereign Identity
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
To facilitate further discussion, we clarify the definition of an
identity. Aligned with the Sovrin Glossary [57], this work defines
identity as a collection of attributes, where each attribute represents
a particular characteristic, such as name or age. Attributes are
verified through attestations from issuers. These attestations are
termed claims. A collection of claims compiled by an issuer to
describe an identity owner is a credential.
Credentials are stored in a personal wallet, typically on the iden-
tity owner’s device. The exchange of credentials between parties
is illustrated in Figure 1. Issuers share verifiable credentials with
identity owners, who can then share verifiable presentations of
these credentials with service providers. The additional term “veri-
fiable” indicates that the credentials may be verified by the service
providers; this concept is further discussed in Section 2.1.3. Service
providers rely on the credential issuer’s authority without direct
interaction. They infer the issuer’s identity from the credential and
use their existing knowledge of the issuer and their authority to
determine whether to accept the credential (only a government
authority can issue a driver’s licence). This separation of creden-
tials and isolation of the issuer from the service provider during
credential presentations mitigate the concentration of issuer power
that challenges the centralized identity models [5, 56].
This process of issuing, storing, and presenting identity creden-
tials, known as the credential exchange, is often portrayed as the
entirety of SSI [65, 126]. While it represents a crucial component
of SSI, it does not capture all of the components. For that, we will
turn to the Trust Over IP Stack.
2
TRUST OVER IP AND THE TRUSTFUL
MODEL FOR SSI
The Trust Over IP (ToIP) Stack introduced by the ToIP Foundation1
is a four-layer architectural framework designed to establish trust
between users over the Internet and other digital networks. It is
inspired by the TCP/IP stack, which standardized packet exchange
and enabled the development of the Internet. The ToIP Stack, how-
ever, emphasizes human trust through establishing digital identities
and secure communication.
We outline the structure of SSI through the trust layers of the
ToIP stack to analyze fundamental concepts and components of SSI
in the context of forming trust. Following the analysis, we introduce
a minimal trust model, our baseline trustful model.
2.1
SSI through Trust Over IP Layers
Our adaptation of ToIP layers tailored to SSI with the appropriate
terminologies [57] is shown in Figure 2. We walk through each
layer, introduce the relevant components of SSI, and summarise
implementation choices available for the components.
2.1.1
Layer 1: Trust Support. Layer 1 provides a way to identify
participants and verify the provenance of these identities through
trust anchors. This layer provides a trusted foundation upon which
the subsequent layers are constructed.
Identification. Every party represents themselves with a globally
unique self-generated identity handle [51]. Recipients communi-
cating with the party use this identifier to derive public attributes
1https://trustoverip.org
Layer 4
(Trust Applications)
Human Trust
Applications
Espouse
Trust
Assumptions
Technological Trust
Layer 3
(Trust Tasks)
Issuer
Trust
Service Provider
Identity Owner
Verifiable
Presentation
Presentation Metadata
Verifiable Credential(s)
Proof(s)
Credential Metadata
Claims
Proof
Verifiable
Credential
Credential Exchange
Layer 2
(Trust Spanning)
Agent/Wallet
Agent/Wallet
Communication
Layer 1
(Trust Support)
...
DID Registry 
DID Method
DIDDoc
DID Method
DIDDoc
DID Registry 
Figure 2: SSI through Trust Over IP Stack
(e.g., public key) [133]. Issuers create long-lived identifiers shared
broadly, while other entities may create new identifiers for each
communication. Two general implementation approaches to pro-
viding identifiers are decentralized identifiers (DIDs) or public keys.
DIDs are a URI of the format 𝑑𝑖𝑑: 𝑚𝑒𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑑: 𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑒𝑟. The DID
method specifies how the identifier is de-referenced. De-referencing
a DID produces a DID Document (DIDDoc), which details the en-
tity’s public attributes. Every DIDDoc must include at least a public
key for the subject [133]. Alternatively, a simple public key can
serve as an identifier, eliminating the DID/DIDDoc abstraction2.
Trust Anchors. Trust anchors affirm the provenance of identities
and public attributes (DIDDocs). They are “trusted components”
that serve as starting points for establishing trust across the other
layers [75]. For implementation, in distributed DID-based scenarios,
verifiable data registries (VDRs, e.g., blockchain) often serve as
trust anchors. However, public key infrastructure (PKI) may also be
employed, notably when raw public keys are used instead of DIDs.
Recording a DIDDoc on a publicly accessible VDR, such as a
blockchain, guarantees the record’s immutability and auditabil-
ity [53, 97]. The method associated with a VDR-backed DID speci-
fies the location of the corresponding DIDDoc [17]. For instance,
𝑑𝑖𝑑: 𝑒𝑡ℎ𝑟indicates the identifier is an Ethereum address that locates
the DIDDoc [53]. Trust anchors are not always VDRs; 𝑑𝑖𝑑: 𝑤𝑒𝑏
(and DID-less approaches) rely on traditional public key infrastruc-
ture to anchor identities and public attributes [62].
2.1.2
Layer 2: Trust Spanning. Layer 2 focuses solely on facilitat-
ing communication between agents and wallets of Layer 3 partici-
pants. Agents, the software libraries managing credential requests,
facilitate this communication and interact with wallets [57]. For
2DID methods used for short-lived DIDs, where a trust anchor is not required, fre-
quently require that the DID is the public key (𝑑𝑖𝑑: 𝑘𝑒𝑦[101], 𝑑𝑖𝑑: 𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑟, [45]). In
these instances, DIDDoc resolution involves extracting the public key directly from
the DID itself.
3

Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
Krul et al.
implementation, building upon DIDs (Layer 1), DIDComm [40] es-
tablishes a suite of protocols for inter-entity messaging. DIDComm
utilizes the public keys associated with DIDs to encrypt messages
exchanged between entities.
2.1.3
Layer 3: Trust Tasks. Layer 3 facilitates the credential ex-
change. It defines the standardized, interoperable credential formats
(e.g., driver’s licenses). It also specifies verification mechanisms (e.g.,
signatures), credential management protocols (collection, storage,
presentation), and optional extensions to the core process.
Credential Formats. Credentials adhere to a standardized for-
mat comprising credential metadata, claims, and proof. Credential
metadata encompasses the issuer’s identity (e.g., DID), credential
type (e.g., driver’s license), and issuance date, among other de-
tails [132]. Claims represent the identity attributes verified by the
issuer (e.g., name, birthdate, address, licence no.). The proof en-
sures the credentials are tamper-proof for integrity and provenance.
Presentations are temporary, ephemeral documents containing ver-
ifiable credentials that service providers request. Some works con-
sider presentations synonymous with verifiable credentials [56].
Regarding implementation, W3C verifiable credentials are the pre-
dominant data model, employing JSON-LD to define the credential
structure [63, 151]. The AnonCreds JSON format links credential
definitions to DIDs stored on VDR (Layer 1) [79].
Verification Mechanisms (Proofs). Credentials contain a verifica-
tion mechanism as a proof of the credential’s authenticity. This
proof may be provided through a signature, where the issuer signs
the entire credential (metadata and claims) with their private key.
Service providers verify the credential’s authenticity by retrieving
the issuer’s public key from their DID. For implementation, ECDSA
signatures are a common choice [87]. All surveyed credential pro-
files use signatures as a verification mechanism, although some do
not present the signature to the service provider; instead, the iden-
tity owner presents a zero-knowledge proof of knowledge of a valid
signature [28, 141] (discussed further in Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2).
Protocols. Protocols define the procedures controlling the ex-
change of credentials, encompassing how identity owners request
credentials from issuers, how service providers request presenta-
tions from identity owners, and how identity owners present creden-
tials to service providers. Many proposals implement various pro-
tocols. For instance, multiple related projects from OpenID address
the issuing and presentation of verifiable credentials [98, 140, 149].
Extensions. Extensions add additional SSI features to the creden-
tial exchange. Our discussion utilizes these extensions to introduce
threats and analyze their risk and mitigations to derive various
trust models (Section 3).
2.1.4
Layer 4: Trust Applications. Layer 4 depicts the identity appli-
cations ecosystem (e.g., government, health, banking). Each appli-
cation is considered to have Trust Assumptions. They define trusted
and untrusted parties, interactions, and components. For instance,
an application may distrust identity owners and assume they may
present fraudulent credentials.
Deriving Trust Requirements from Trust Assumptions. Intuitively,
a trust assumption implies a threat – e.g., suggesting the credential
presented to the service provider could be fraudulent.
In fact, we can derive that a trust assumption (or lack thereof)
implies the application accepting the presence of a threat. Threats
pose a risk to some participants and must be addressed through con-
straints. That is, a Layer 4 application that distrusts identity owners
and assumes they may present fraudulent credentials mandates the
implementation of tamper-proof credentials in Layer 3.
Based on this observation, in our analysis of trust requirements
for trust models, we consider that the human trust assumptions
made in Layer 4 are stated as threats, which defines constraints that
need to be addressed by the components of Layers 1-3.
As a summary, Table 2 outlines common implementations or
standardization initiatives for each SSI component discussed in this
section. Trust assumptions in Layer 4 determine the use of these
components.
Table 2: Common SSI Trust Over IP Layer Implementations
Layer 4
Application
Various trust assumptions impacting choices Layer 1-3
Layer 3
Format
W3C VC [132] (JSON-LD [63], JWT-VC [103], SD-JWT-
VC [139]), AnonCred JSON [79], MDOC [147], ICOA DTC [84],
x.509, IRMA XML [55]
Verification
Mechanism
ECDSA [87], RS256, CL [28], BBS [141], BoundBBS [145], zk-
SNARK [114], GGM-Merkle [109]
Protocol
CHAPI [31], WACI [8], Aries Protocols [77], OpenID4VCI [98],
OpenID4VP [140], SOIPv2 [149]
Extensions
Detailed in Section 3
Layer 2
Communication
DIDComm [40]
Layer 1
Identification
DID (indy [44], sov [97], ion [52], ebsi [48], key [101]), Any
Public Key (x.509 [74])
Trust Anchor
Blockchain (Indy DLT [83], Bitcoin [52], EBSI Trust Reg-
istries [49], Ethereum [53], Parity [138], Iroha [82], Fabric [80])
IOTA [54], GNU Name System [125], Any PKI (CA, FIDO [6])
2.2
The Trustful Model
Here, we introduce the first trust model: trustful SSI. Trustful SSI
encapsulates the fundamental principles of SSI, establishing the
minimum responsibilities for each component. As mentioned, the
model is represented as a collection of threats accepted as posing
risks under the application’s trust assumptions. As a minimal model,
it considers the threats relating to potential credential integrity and
external actors, along with mitigation strategies. To clarify the
design and responsibilities of the SSI components, we group the
threats by components as a functional unit that implements a group
of features.
2.2.1
Identity Owner Identification.
Threat 2.1. If identity owners can present credentials without
a verification mechanism, they may present credentials (e.g., a dri-
ver’s licence) that were never issued and do not represent their
identity (e.g., the identity owner is not licensed to drive).
Risk: A service provider may authorize an identity owner who
should not have been authorized.
Constraint: Credentials (and the presentations that encompass
them) must be verifiable. Credentials must be issued alongside some
cryptographic proof that the service provider can use to verify the
integrity of credentials.
4

SoK: Trusting Self-Sovereign Identity
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
Mitigations: Identity owner identification is implemented through
the verifiable credentials in Layer 3. When the proof portion of
verifiable credentials uses a signature to ensure the integrity of
credentials the minimum requirement from the signature is three
basic algorithms that provide key generation, signing, and verifi-
cation functions. These signatures must satisfy correctness and
security [87] such that a service provider will always accept a valid
signature by an issuer, and importantly, an adversary cannot forge
a signature that passes the verification function but was not created
by the issuer.
2.2.2
Issuer Identification.
Threat 2.2. An issuer may not have the authority to issue cre-
dentials of any type (e.g., may only issue state driver’s licenses).
Risk: A service provider may accept a credential issued by an en-
tity that did not have the authority to attest to the identity claims.
Constraint: The issuer of a credential must be identifiable from a
verifiable presentation such that service providers can be assured
that the claims they have been presented were issued by an issuer
that they have some human trust in (trust that a government entity
may issue driver’s licenses).
Mitigations: Layers 1 and 3 work together to address this con-
straint. Issuers embed and sign their DID in the Layer 3 verifiable
credentials. Service providers then use this DID to derive what en-
tity issued the credential and verify their authority. The immutabil-
ity of credentials (Threat 2.1) ensures that once issued, the issuer’s
DID can not be modified. The DID is then de-referenced to the pub-
licly recorded DIDDoc to verify the identity and rights of the issuer.
2.2.3
Non-Transferability.
Threat 2.3. The identity owner may present a correctly issued
credential; however, it was not issued to them. Rather, it was col-
lected through collusion with another identity owner or stolen from
an unknowing identity owner (e.g., Alice presents Bob’s driver’s
licence as if it was hers).
Risk: A service provider may authorize an identity owner by in-
correctly believing claims that do not actually describe them.
Constraint: Verifiable credentials and their presentations must
be tied to the identity owner such that they can not be transferred
incorrectly to another identity owner.
Mitigations: The identity owner’s DID is included in the verifiable
credential. The immutability (Section 2.2.1) ensures that the DID
cannot be modified after issuance. Ownership of the credential is
provided by proving knowledge of the secret key associated with
the public key of the DID (e.g., a Sigma protocol [41]). The issuer
ensures that the identity owner knows the secret key when they
embed the DID in the credential. Service providers perform the
same verification when receiving presentations. For an adversary to
present a verifiable credential as their own, they must have knowl-
edge of the secret key associated with the embedded DID.
2.2.4
Protected Communication.
Threat 2.4. An outside entity may intercept a credential in tran-
sit, either passively or actively. Passive interception would allow
the outside entity to learn about the contents of the presentation,
while active interception would allow the outside entity to modify
the contents of the presentation.
Risk: For identity owners, their credentials in transit may unknow-
ingly have their private identity information stolen or modified.
Constraint: The credential exchange of Layer 2 must be secured
to protect communication between entities from outside entities.
Mitigations: The encryption in DIDComm protocols (Layer 2)
ensures that no eavesdropper may learn the contents of verifiable
presentations. Additionally, credentials cannot be modified by a
third party if they are encrypted in transit. This includes the threats
of replay [136], and man-in-the-middle attacks [60] with protections
such as token-binding in the Layer 3 verifiable presentations [100].
Threat 2.5. An outside entity may interfere with DID resolu-
tion, resulting in an incorrect DIDDoc being de-referenced.
Risk: A service provider may attempt to verify a credential using
an incorrect DIDDoc of the issuer, resulting in either the authoriza-
tion of an inauthentic or rejection of an authentic credential.
Constraint: Layer 1 must provide assurances in the provenance
of resolved DIDDocs.
Mitigations: When de-referencing a DID, service providers must
be sure to use protected communication channels. Additionally, the
registries publicly hosting the DIDDocs should provide provenance
guarantees that the DIDDoc has not been modified. At the very
least, these registries need to provide some level of assurance speci-
fied by the Layer 4 application (e.g., blockchain-backed DID [53, 97],
certificate authority-backed DID [62]).
3
EXTENDING TRUST REQUIREMENTS
While adequate in many scenarios, trustful SSI may not fully ad-
dress the intricacies and security demands of all digital identity
applications. This is evident in government-issued digital identi-
ties, where the identity data may be highly sensitive. The trustful
model’s assumption of service provider trustworthiness overlooks
potential misuse or insecure storage of identity data.
This motivates more cautious approaches to SSI, where a broader
set of trust requirements should be considered. For instance, since
applications that follow the trustful model do not consider the
service providers a threat, identity owners may share their entire
driver’s licence credentials to prove their age. This is problematic as
a dishonest service provider could collect the additional claims in a
driver’s licence for malicious purposes or collect them innocently
but store them insecurely.
Here, we broaden the trust requirements by introducing more
threats perceived by issuers, identity holders and service providers.
3.1
For Issuers
The trustful model did not include threats that impacted the issuers.
Here, we introduce an extended set of threats for issuers.
3.1.1
Identity On-Boarding. New identity owners may be brought
into an SSI system through a process known as on-boarding.
5

Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
Krul et al.
Threat 3.1. Potential identity owners may attempt to mislead
an issuer when being on-boarded such that they are issued creden-
tials that do not represent their true identity (e.g., being issued a
driver’s licence credential with an incorrect name or driver’s class).
Risk: Issuers could be misled into issuing invalid credentials.
Constraint: Credentials should only be issued if some assurances
exist regarding the validity of the identity being attested.
Mitigations: Much of the issuer’s responsibility in identifying a
potential identity owner is offloaded outside technical constraints.
Issuers are expected to perform some level of due diligence [143].
Take, for example, a government-issued identity; it is reasonable
to expect the government to have prior knowledge of the individ-
ual requesting a credential. Large portions of Sovrin’s contribu-
tions in Layer 4 have been creating frameworks and specifications
that define the responsible behaviour of identity issuers to protect
the system’s integrity by having only responsible issuers prepare
credentials [56]. This approach can be augmented with frequent
auditings, such as what is done for certificate authorities in tradi-
tional public key infrastructure (PKI) [9]. Two optional extensions
in Layer 3 provide solutions to address this threat.
Verifying Existing Credentials; Taking the service provider role,
issuers may request a credential that verifies common claims present
in both an existing credential and the new one being pursued. If the
claims align with the claims expected by the issuer, they issue the
requested credential (e.g., a name claim matches another claim).
To note, there is no indication within verifiable credentials that
the issuer performed this verification. This approach must assume
that the additional credential requested was not compromised
through similar means. Finally, a potential identity owner may
not have an existing SSI verifiable credential they can present, es-
pecially if they are a new user.
eID Derivation; Deriving identity claims from outside SSI by
bootstrapping SSI to existing identity schemes allows for low-
friction identity on-boarding. Abraham et al. [1] presented an SSI
implementation that enabled deriving credentials from existing
eID identity infrastructure. Identity owners created non-interactive
zero-knowledge proofs [114] that their verifiable credentials were
correctly derived from an existing eID system.
3.1.2
Issuance of Sensitive Claims.
Threat 3.2. An identity owner may not have the right to view
the contents of a credential issued to them. Such as when the cre-
dential is a confidential letter of recommendation regarding them.
Risk: An identity owner could collect sensitive claims, violating
the privacy of the issuers.
Constraint: Issuers should be able to issue credentials where
claims are bound by a constraint that precludes parties – including
the identity owner – from learning the contents of the claim.
Mitigations: A possible approach is Encrypted Claims where an
issuer provides asymmetrically encrypted credentials with a se-
cret key unknown to the identity owner. Identity owners present
these credentials to service providers who know the secret key
and can decrypt the claims. Guajardo et al. [67] introduced this in
anonymous credentials. These constructions are limited as prior
knowledge of the claim-accessing party is required but have found
renewed interest through anonymous tokens [32, 42].
3.2
For Identity Owners
In the trustful model, the only threat to identity owners was the
collection of credentials during transit. Here, we expand with the
introduction of four new threats.
3.2.1
Selective Disclosure. Data Minimalization, collecting only
necessary identity claims by the service providers, is a fundamental
principle of SSI [5]. It is realized through the extension of selective
disclosure at Layer 3.
Threat 3.3. A service provider may collect more identity claims
than required, either maliciously or without harmful intentions,
such as a bar collecting an identity owner’s name and address dur-
ing age verification.
Risk: Excessive collection of claims by service providers elevates
the risks faced by identity owners when presenting credentials.
Malicious service providers may exploit identity data for financial
gain or profiling purposes [23], while even well-intentioned ser-
vice providers inadvertently elevate identity loss risks with to their
over-collection of identity data [156].
Constraint: Credential presentations must allow identity owners
to present a subset of the claims in their credentials where service
providers may not learn anything beyond what was presented.
Mitigations: Selective disclosure mechanisms can be achieved
either through claim redaction or predicates.
Claim Redaction; enables identity owners to remove claims from
a verifiable credential when generating a presentation [157]. Service
providers can verify the authenticity and integrity of the revealed
claims without having access to the entire credential. Claim redac-
tion describes an outcome where the service providers are only
able to learn a subset of the claims that were initially included in a
verifiable credential (e.g., a birthdate on a driver’s license). Some
approaches require that the identity owner only share the claims
they want to disclose along with the accompanying proofs [47];
even though claims are not strictly being redacted, the outcome
remains the same.
Predicates; allows identity owners to provide a predicate proof
(TRUE/FALSE) on a claim (e.g., their birthdate claim indicates they
are over 18) without revealing the actual claim value. The extent
of the predicates available depends on the implementation chosen.
Some implementations limit predicates to numerical ranges (e.g.,
age > 18) [28], while others enable more complex assertions (e.g.,
the listed address is within some defined city boundary) [94].
There are many proposals for implementing SSI selective dis-
closure categorized under three approaches: atomic (signing each
claim individually), hash records (signing a hash of each claim
rather than the claim itself, such that the service provider verifies
the signature against the hashes of the claims and that the dis-
closed claim is the pre-image of the hash) [139], and zero-knowledge
proofs (either as a custom proof designed for a specifically sig-
nature scheme [28, 141], or a generic zero-knowledge proof on
the claim and credential [94, 114]). While all of these approaches
enable claim redaction, only zero-knowledge proofs support gen-
uine predicate selective disclosure. This functionality can be emu-
lated by having the issuer sign a pre-computed predicate claim (i.e.
𝑎𝑔𝑒_𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟_18 = 𝑇𝑅𝑈𝐸) during credential creation.
6

SoK: Trusting Self-Sovereign Identity
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
3.2.2
Unlinkability.
Threat 3.4. Selectively disclosed claims provide limited privacy
preservation if service providers can link presented claims to the
same identity owner across consecutive presentations or through
collusion with other service providers. Consider a venue using pre-
sentations to track patronage or a car rental service linking claims
with information from an insurance agent without consent.
Risk: If a presentation provided to a service provider contains
an identifier unique to the identity owner, service providers can
easily link an identity owner’s actions [35]. Service providers may
then learn more about an identity owner’s identity than what the
identity owner consented to.
Constraint: Verifiable presentations should not include any corre-
latable identifier the service provider can derive, such as identity
owner DID or signature.
Mitigations: Single-show [14, 120] or 𝑘-show [93] credentials offer
unlinkability only for a fixed (one or 𝑘) number of presentations of
a credential. For effective SSI integration, credentials must enable
identity owners to generate an unlimited number of unlinkable
presentations from the same credential. Two unlinkability levels
exist: complete and limited.
Complete Unlinkability; To achieve complete unlinkability, where
no presentations may ever be linked to the same credential, two
transformations must be applied. The removal of correlating factors
addresses the vulnerability of a correlating DID identifier in every
credential. Some works suggest managing the scope of DIDs, where
the identity owner creates multiple DID pseudonyms, each used
for a small subset of their credentials [101]. This still enables cor-
relation for credentials issued to the same DID. Instead, verifiable
credentials should not have DIDs (or other identifiers) embedded in
them; DIDs remain only as a means for DIDComm communications
and encryption (Layer 2) [40] and issuer identification (Layer 1)
[143]. At times, this is the extent of unlinkability afforded (Coelho
et al. [38], Takemiya and Vanieiev [137]).
Still, the signature of the credential remains a correlating factor.
With the transformation of signatures, when the identity owner is
preparing a credential for presentation, they generate a new proof
that they then provide in place of the signature from the issuer. This
new proof is an unlinkable zero-knowledge proof of knowledge of
the credential’s signature. Here, anonymous credential signatures
are used (BBS(+) [24, 141], CL [26], PS [122]).
Limited Unlinkability; Complete unlinkability is not always de-
sirable. In some situations, the service provider must be able to
identify repeat presentations of identity owners, such as to prevent
Sybil attacks [107]. If a service provider relies on SSI credentials for
authentication into their service, such as through user accounts,
then limited unlinkability is required, allowing service providers to
identify repeat presentations; otherwise, a single credential could
be used to create many accounts. The limited unlinkability construc-
tion from Zhang et al. [153] included a unique identifier derived
from a combination of the identity owner and the service provider’s
identifiers. Service providers may use this persistent identifier to
identify repeat presentations but can not use it to correlate presen-
tations made to other service providers.
3.2.3
Key and Wallet Management.
Threat 3.5. A malicious party could compromise and steal cre-
dentials or keys, or the identity owner may lose their keys.
Risk: An identity owner who loses their keys or credentials (or
has them compromised by a malicious party) then loses control
over their personal identity information and its use.
Constraint: Credentials and keys must be protected in wallets,
ensuring they are not vulnerable to being stolen or lost.
Mitigations: The risk of losing keys and, in turn, access to the cre-
dentials in the identity wallet are not concerns unique to SSI [106].
Potential solutions are:
Trusted Third Party Key Recovery; Soltani et al. [130] proposed a
key recovery method using trusted third parties for SSI. The wallet
of the identity owner is still in control of the user’s credentials.
As a precaution, third-party providers back up the keys in escrow.
Approaches vary across implementations, but all either rely on
some form of trusted third-party service [90, 96] or friend [96, 111].
Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA); With multi-factor authenti-
cation for credential presentations, the compromise of a wallet
does not allow a malicious actor to present the compromised cre-
dentials as their own. Zhang et al. [153] implemented single sign-
on using anonymous credentials following a structure compatible
with Layer 3. Service providers could require that identity owners
present the same credentials from multiple devices.
Multiple Devices; The same design used by Zhang et al. [153]
for multi-factor authentication also enables multiple devices. Since
credentials can be stored on any number of devices, identity owners
could present their credentials from any registered device.
Threat 3.6. Identity owners cannot always be expected to fol-
low best practices regarding safeguarding and maintaining access to
their wallets. Without proper consideration, identity owners could
rely on insecure wallet protection mechanisms (e.g., credentials
stored on devices without access protection through passwords).
Risk: Sacrificing credential security and sovereignty for usability
places identity owners at risk of damaging their self-sovereignty
(losing control of its use) or leakage of their credential data.
Constraint: Identity owners must maintain control over their
credentials and keys regardless of how they are stored [5].
Mitigations: A solution such as Cloud Wallets; places the en-
tire responsibility of credential management with a cloud provider.
Naively trusting a cloud provider with control over identity claims
and their disclosure would violate the self-sovereignty of the iden-
tity owners (the cloud provider can dictate credential use). Further-
more, Lagutin et al. [91] identified that constrained (e.g., embedded)
devices might be unable to handle the resource overhead required by
verifiable credentials. Their work ensured the constrained devices
maintained control over their DIDs, but the credential processing
was delegated to an authorization server. Notably, this implementa-
tion requires potentially unfounded trust in the authorization server
and is only appropriate for SSI deployments in limited scopes.
To address these trust concerns, Krenn et al. [88], later im-
proved by Haböck and Krenn [68] presented anonymous creden-
tials for the cloud. The proposed cloud wallets could never access
the stored attributes in the clear, even when presenting the cre-
dentials. Their implementation utilized proxy re-encryption [11],
7

Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
Krul et al.
structure-preserving signatures [59], and zero-knowledge proofs of
knowledge [11]. To provide transparency of a cloud wallet’s actions,
Chase et al. [33] proposed a credential transparency system that
allowed an identity owner to audit the actions of their cloud wallet.
3.3
For Service Providers
Section 2.2 introduced several threats service providers face; here,
we expand on the threats faced by service providers and introduce
new threats.
3.3.1
Non-Transferability. Previously, as a means to address non-
transferability (Threat 2.3), the concept of embedding the iden-
tity owner DID in the credential during issuance was introduced.
However, this is not acceptable when unlinkability needs to be
preserved. Here, we expand the mitigation approaches towards
non-transferability through proving what you know or what you
own with linkable and unlinkable variations of each.
What You Know; DIDs embedded in a verifiable credential pro-
vide a suitable identifier to prove possession of a credential. This
approach is the simplest and most often used [109]. This is visi-
ble non-transferability, providing service providers with a linkable
identifier in every credential presentation.
A more robust solution is required to preserve unlinkability;
we classify these as hidden. Camenisch and Lysyanskaya [28] pre-
sented protocols where the identity owners commit to a link secret
when requesting a credential. The issuer verifies that the identity
owner knows the committed link secret without learning the secret
and signs the commitment. When identity owners present their
credentials, they recommit to their link secret and share this pseu-
donym with the service provider. The service provider checks that
the identity owner owns the committed secret. The identity owner
also proves that the issuer signed a commitment on the same hidden
secret. BBS signatures follow a similar principle [104]. Alternatively,
the BoundBBS proposal uses BLS signatures [19] to bind credentials
through knowledge of the secret BLS key without using the blind
signing feature of BBS. Using BLS signatures removes the need to
manage the representation of the link secrets and simplifies the
BBS specification [145].
What You Have; Physical ID cards often have photos of the holder
to provide these same proof-of-possession assurances using biomet-
rics. Othman and Callahan [119] proposed the Horcrux Protocol,
an SSI construction based on biometrics. This construction estab-
lished DIDs linked to biometric factors, tying credentials issued to
a specific identity owner. However, this implementation did not
provide the unlinkability features and is a visible biometric solution.
As a hidden implementation of biometric non-transferability, Im-
pagliazzo and More [85] introduced a scheme that tied anonymous
credentials to biometric identifiers. Their construction enabled non-
transferability without compromising the privacy of the identity
owner. Adams [4] and Gerdes et al. [61] presented improvements
on this scheme.
Credentials may also be tied to the identity owner’s specific
device (i.e., the device that hosts the credential wallet). These iden-
tifiers do not always have to be public/private key pairs: in the
Internet of Things (IoT) context, Niya et al. [116] exploited the
manufacturing variability of devices to produce a unique device
identifier to embed in credentials.
3.3.2
Credential Validity (Revocation).
Threat 3.7. Credentials have a lifespan; identity owners can
lose the privileges associated with a credential (e.g., having the
right to drive revoked or a university identity card expiring after a
student graduates).
Risk: A service provider who accepts a credential that the issuer
has revoked is vulnerable to accepting identity owners who no
longer have authority over the credentials they present.
Constraint: Service providers must be able to determine if the
credentials they are presented are still valid.
Mitigations: We can broadly categorize the mitigating approaches
as either expiring or immediate.
With Expiring credential validity, the issuer specifies a validity
period. When a service provider is presented with a credential,
they reject any credentials for which the validity period has passed.
Credential validity can be renewed through the re-issuance of the
credentials. Rather than requiring the whole credential to be re-
issued, issuers can instead generate lightweight attestations to the
validity of the credential that accompanies the presentation. Work
by Abraham et al. [2] proposed a revocation scheme where the
Layer 1 network provides these attestations. Camenisch et al. [25]
provided a similar construction, where issuers regularly update and
publish values that identity owners retrieve and use to re-validate
their expired credentials.
These short lifespans allow for efficient verification of creden-
tials. However, they are unable to provide immediate revocation,
and a balance must be struck between having a short enough va-
lidity period that credentials can be revoked in an acceptable time
frame while not being too short that issuers are over-burdened
re-issuing or attesting to credential validity.
With Immediate revocation, the validity of a credential is altered
with direct effect. Commonly, this is accomplished through a pub-
licly available list of credential statuses (either listing the revoked
or valid credentials). Issuers update this record if a credential must
be revoked; service providers reference the list when verifying a
credential. Abraham et al. [3] proposed using a revocation list uti-
lizing the existing Layer 1 distributed ledger.
Rather than maintaining a list of revoked or valid credentials,
accumulators can collect the identifiers of all valid credentials into
a single value that is published [36]. When a credential is revoked,
the accumulator is updated to no longer include the revoked creden-
tial. To preserve the unlinkability requirement, the identity owner
proves in zero-knowledge that their credential is registered in the
dynamic accumulator [27].
Instead of a list or accumulator – but still with direct effect –
reclaimID, from Schanzenbach et al. [124] used the online nature
of their identity records to update the record’s status.
Compared to expiry credential validity, immediate revocation
removes the burden of re-issuing credentials or re-publishing val-
ues for the issuers. In exchange, the identity infrastructure must
accommodate the revocation or status list.
3.3.3
Identity Owner Identification.
Threat 3.8. Identity owners may not always be collecting cre-
dentials from trusted issuers. There may be situations where iden-
tity owners self-published claims of their identity.
8

SoK: Trusting Self-Sovereign Identity
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
Risk: Service providers are provided with no indication of the
trustworthiness of an identity owner’s self-published credentials.
Constraint: Presentations of self-published credentials should
provide some confidence for service providers in the claims truth.
Mitigations: Reputation of Self Published Claims is an approach
where reputation is built by collecting attestations to the validity of
credentials in a web-of-trust approach [135]. Aside from variations
across implementations and how reputation is collected and mea-
sured, implementations vary in their motivations as to why there
is no trusted issuer.
Threat 3.9. Identity owners may need to delegate the authority
of their credentials to another identity owner in an exceptional
circumstance (e.g., in healthcare).
Risk: Without delegation capabilities, identity owners who are in
situations where they are unable to present their credentials are
essentially left without their identity.
Constraint: Credentials should enable their authority and claims
to be shared with another identity owner when required.
Mitigations:
For Delegation of Credentials, the identity owner
takes on the role of an issuer, passing on the rights of their creden-
tial to a new identity owner [110]. Delegation can follow a chain,
such as in the example of a hospital that issues a credential to a
doctor who then issues the rights to their associates when they are
on leave [43] or a patient who delegates a letter of their authority
to a friend or family member [110]. Chase and Lysyanskaya [34]
(and Demuynck et al. [43]) introduced delegatable anonymous cre-
dentials as a further constraint that the delegating issuer should
not be identifiable from the presentation of a delegated credential.
Threat 3.10. The ownership of a credential issued by a trust-
worthy issuer does not indicate that the identity owner will behave
appropriately. From Sections 3.2.1 (selective disclosure) and 3.2.2
(unlinkability), the service provider may not even be able to iden-
tify a misbehaving identity owner. Consider a case where SSI is
used when renting a car; a driver’s license credential, while proving
identity and a right to drive, offers no guarantee of safe driving.
Risk: Service providers may enter into a relationship with untrust-
worthy identity owners, and become unacceptably vulnerable.
Constraint: Service providers must be afforded some level of re-
course or protection against identity owners who misbehave3.
Mitigations: Using Blacklisting and Reputation, when unlinkabil-
ity is not considered, a service provider can easily blacklist a misbe-
having identity owner from their service through their DID. With
unlinkability, this becomes a more complex problem. Additionally,
one service provider may wish to report their experiences to other
service providers while maintaining the identity owner’s privacy.
Tsang et al. [144] proposed a scheme that supported the blacklisting
of anonymous credentials. Nakanishi and Kanatani [112] expanded
on this by allowing service providers to contribute to a reputation
score of identity owners rather than a boolean blacklist.
Anonymity Revocation; Another challenge introduced by un-
linkability is how service providers can take recourse (beyond just
blacklisting from their service) against misbehaving identity own-
ers. With roots in group signatures [18], anonymity revocation en-
ables a service provider, supported by a mutually trusted third
3The concept of misbehaving is situational to the identities use and the service
provider’s policies.
party between the identity owner and service provider, to revoke
the anonymity provided by unlinkability. Camenisch and Lysyan-
skaya [26] proposed that identity owners include some traceable
identifier encrypted against the public key of a trusted revocation
manager. The encrypted identifier included de-anonymization con-
ditions to ensure the service provider could not tamper with the
agreed-upon de-anonymization policy between the service provider
and the identity owner.
3.3.4
Issuer Identification. The authority to issue credentials is not
enforced through SSI; this falls on the human trust and governance
layer of SSI (Layer 4) [56]. As a brief expansion, some SSI proposals
provide a means for the service provider to build trust in issuers
that may not be traditionally recognized via reputation.
Issuer Reputation; From the same motivation of Threat 2.2, issuer
reputation mechanisms enable service providers to learn some cal-
culated reputation scores about an issuer. This reputation aims to
measure the trustworthiness of an issuer’s attestations. Bhattacharya
et al. [16] used the number of credentials issued by the issuer in a
time window. Additionally, reputation may be measured against
the specific claims of a credential rather than the issuer [142].
3.3.5
Offline Verification.
Threat 3.11. The identity owner’s control of credentials in SSI
lends itself well to offline operations where the identity owner or
service provider may not have reliable Layer 1 network access (e.g.,
verification of a credential in a remote region).
Risk: Service providers may be denied from accepting (or identity
owners presenting) valid credentials if their Layer 1 network con-
nection is interrupted or unavailable.
Constraint: The Layer 3 credential exchange between identity
owners and service providers must only rely on Layer 2 peer-to-peer
communications and not require access to the Layer 1 network.
Mitigations: The self-contained proofs (signatures) in verifiable
credentials permit offline verification. The peer-to-peer communi-
cations of Layer 2 and pair-wise DIDs ensure neither the service
provider nor the identity owner is required to reference the Layer 1
network during credential exchange. What is lost is the service
provider’s ability to de-reference issuer DIDs, find credential struc-
tures, and check revocation registries. Solutions to the DID and
structure challenges are agnostic of implementation but introduce
further constraints on the situations in which offline verification
could be performed. If the service provider is offline, they must
know the credential structure they are requesting and have de-
referenced the issuer’s DID to their public key before being offline.
In many cases, this is acceptable, especially if the service provider
has intermittent access to the network to update their local cache.
What poses a more significant challenge is Threat 3.7 (credential
validity). Without immediate access to a revocation or status list,
immediate credential validity is incompatible. Credential status op-
tions are likely constrained to expiry [2]. Furthermore, key and wal-
let management cannot rely on possibly inaccessible cloud wallets
(Threat 3.6). Some biometric implementations for non-transferability
(Threat 2.3) rely on server access for secure verification of creden-
tials [119], making them incompatible with offline verification.
9

Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
Krul et al.
4
THE TRUST MODELS
This section analyses the extended trust requirements, presented as
threats and mitigations in Section 3, and introduces two additional
models as alternatives to the trustful model (Section 2.2).
4.1
Threat Dependencies
The discussions in Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 revealed implicit de-
pendencies between threats as they emerged. Figure 3 summarizes
these dependencies.
Includes
Suggests
Constrains
Threat 3.4
Unlinkability
Threat 2.3
Non-transferability
Threat 3.7
Credential Validity
Threat 3.10
Recourse
Constrains
Threat 3.11
Offline Verification
Threat 3.3
Selective
Disclosure
Figure 3: SSI Threat Dependencies
The privacy protection provided by selective disclosure is com-
promised if a malicious or colluding service provider may correlate
presentations. This necessitates the inclusion of Threat 3.4 (unlink-
ability) if Threat 3.3 (selective disclosure) is included in the trust
assumptions.
Threat 2.3 (non-transferability) necessitates non-transferable cre-
dentials. Approaches that utilize an embedded identifier visible to
service providers introduce a correlatable identifier that enables
linking. In the presence of Threat 3.4 (unlinkability), hidden non-
transferability constructions must be employed to mitigate this
risk.
Similarly, for Threat 3.7 (credential validity), approaches that
employ credential validity lists must exclude correlatable identifiers
from the lists and instead adopt an approach where identity owners
prove their membership in an accumulator.
The anonymity potentially provided by unlinkability (Threat 3.4)
may place the service providers at risk, suggesting Threat 3.10
(blacklisting, reputation, and anonymity revocation).
The incorporation of Threat 3.11 (offline verification) imposes
limitations on Threat 3.7 (credential validity), restricting implemen-
tations that require Layer 1 access (immediate via lists).
The consideration of these dependencies is relevant to discus-
sions involving alternative models and the range of trust assump-
tions within each model. Opting to address one threat may require
incorporating another related threat mitigation.
4.2
The Trust Models of SSI
The design of SSI components is influenced by underlying trust
assumptions, often implicitly embedded in academic literature and
industry implementations. We identify and categorize these implicit
trust assumptions into three distinct trust models for SSI, repre-
senting the overarching approaches to trust. These trust models
define the scope of what is untrusted in the Layer 4 application;
effectively, the models identify the threats users face. The three
models represent varying levels of trust, with each subsequent
model assuming less trust, accepting less risk, and subsequently
capturing more threats than the previous. We further explore the
Table 3: Trust Models and Recommended Threats
Extension / Feature
Threat
Trustful
Intermediate Trust
Zero-Trust
Identity Owner Identification
2.1
3.8
3.9
3.10
Issuer Identification
2.2
⊗
Non-Transferability
2.3
Protected Communication
2.4
2.5
Identity On-Boarding
3.1
⊗
Issuance of Sensitive Claims
3.2
Selective Disclosure
3.3
Unlinkability
3.4
Key and Wallet Management
3.5
3.6
Credential Validity (Revocation)
3.7
Offline Verification
3.11
required
likely
optional extension ⊗forbidden
implications of these assumptions and provide recommendations
on what threats are captured by each model in the Implications on
Threat Mitigation sections. Table 3 summarizes the recommended
threats captured by each trust model, providing a reference of the
remaining discussions in this section.
4.2.1
Trustful Model.
General Concept. The trustful model (from Section 2.2) assumes
as few threats as possible. Implementation approaches that follow
this trust model often do not consider the sensitivity of the identity
data to be high. This model assumes complete trust in issuers regard-
ing credential issuance and indicates no trust concerns about service
providers’ behaviour.
Implications on Threat Mitigation. As the most trusting model,
the captured threats must provide a functional identity system.
Credentials should be verifiable by service providers (Threat 2.1
identity owner identification). Service providers should be able to
ascertain the issuer of a credential (Threat 2.2 issuer identification)
and the ownership of credentials (Threat 2.3 non-transferability).
Additionally, the Layer 2 communication channels employed and
the Layer 1 identification should provide assurances of security
(Threats 2.4 and 2.5 protected communication).
Implementing an SSI system under this model necessitates a
rudimentary Layer 1 DID infrastructure for issuer identification,
Layer 2 protocols like DIDComm [40] to safeguard communica-
tions, and a credential format coupled with a simple verification
mechanism such as an ECDSA signature [87].
4.2.2
Intermediate Trust Model.
General Concept. The intermediate trust model extends upon the
trustful model with a lower risk tolerance, making it more suitable
for applications handling sensitive data. Service providers are no
longer trusted, and all entities adopt a more cautious approach to
potential threats. Implementations adhering to the intermediate
trust model often target large-scale identity systems, such as those
used for government-issued credentials, as opposed to internal
company authentication tools.
Implications on Threat Mitigation. To safeguard identity own-
ers from the now untrusted service providers, Threat 3.3 (selective
10

SoK: Trusting Self-Sovereign Identity
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
disclosure) should be considered. The lower risk tolerance also indi-
cates that Threat 3.7 (credential validity) should be included. Follow-
ing the dependencies outlined in Figure 3, Threat 3.4 (unlinkability)
would also need to be included. The implementation of credential
validity (Threat 3.7) and Threat 2.3 (non-transferability) must be
restricted to their unlinkable/hidden variants, and Threat 3.10 (black-
listing, reputation, and anonymity revocation) may be considered
viable.
Implementations do not necessitate modifications to Layer 1 or 2.
Layer 3 would require the selection of a signature scheme that
supports selective disclosure and unlinkability. Furthermore, the
format and protocols may need to be extended to accommodate the
additional extensions.
4.2.3
Zero-Trust Model.
General Concept. The zero trust model challenges the notion of a
predefined set of trusted issuers with absolute authority to verify
identities. Under this assumption, any form of central authority is
considered a threat that demands mitigation. These systems embody
a fully decentralized identity system.
Implications on Threat Mitigation. To eliminate the concept of
trusted issuers, Threat 2.2 (issuer identification) is removed and
prohibited from the model. Threat 3.1 (identity on-boarding) is also
incompatible. Threat 3.8 (self-attestation of claims) is introduced
to augment identity owner identification. Beyond these changes,
the low-risk tolerance implies the same trust assumptions as the
intermediate trust model.
In fully trustless systems, the centralized authority of traditional
public key infrastructure (PKI) is no longer appropriate and, if
present, is replaced with decentralized trust anchors, typically in
the form of a verifiable data registry (VDR) such as a blockchain.
The absence of established issuers necessitates reconsidering the
Layer 3 credential exchange structure. Credentials and their cor-
responding proof mechanisms must support alternative assurance
mechanisms, such as web-of-trust and self-attestation of claims.
5
THE STATE OF SSI
This section examines the current landscape of self-sovereign iden-
tity (SSI) from the perspective of the components and threat as-
sumptions discussed earlier. Both academic literature and industry
implementations are evaluated. The component selections and the
approaches adopted for the extensions are presented. Columns were
omitted in instances where no information was available.
Table 5 presents a compilation of academic contributions gath-
ered through the literature review outlined in Appendix A. The
double horizontal line separates works that present a complete
SSI construction (top) from those that only introduce a variation
of an extension (bottom). Table 6 lists industry implementations.
These implementations are commonly referred to as credential
profiles [89]. In both tables, (−) indicates that the component or
extension was not considered in the implementation. Table 4 fur-
ther categorizes the approaches employed for the extensions in the
credential profiles.
Table 4: Credential Profile Extension Categorizations
Selective Disclosure
None
RS256 [128]
Redact
ECDSA* [87], BBS(+) [141], BoundBBS [145],
GGM-Merkle [109]
Predicates
CL [28], ZKP (zkSNARK [114])
Unlinkability
None
ECDSA, RS256, GGM-Merkle, BLS
Limited
-
Complete
CL, BBS(+), BoundBBS, ZKP (zkSNARK)
Non-Transferability
What you know
Linkable
DID Key, JWT [13], Any Key
Hidden
Link Secret, BLS Key (BoundBBS)
What you have
Linkable
Biometric or Device
Hidden
-
Revocation
None
-
Expiry
Epoch Expiry
Immediate
AnonCreds Revocation [78], W3C Status List
2021 [99], EBSI Status List [50], JWT and CWT
Status List [102]
* When used with SD-JWT-VC redaction is possible [139]. ECDSA does not offer selective disclosure with the other
credential formats in Table 6.
Several notable distinctions between academic and industry SSI
implementations underscore the divergence between the two do-
mains. Most prominently, the choice of trust anchors differs signifi-
cantly. Academic constructions predominantly rely on blockchains,
such as the identity-specific Indy platform [81], as trust anchors.
This extensive use of blockchains has led some to erroneously cat-
egorize SSI as a blockchain identity. However, this is inaccurate,
as the majority of credential profiles in Table 6 utilize traditional
public key infrastructure. This fundamental difference stems from
varying trust assumptions and differing risk priorities. None of the
industry implementations adheres to the zero-trust model, which
disallows the existence of trusted authorities. Instead, all industry
implementations permit some level of trusted entity, whereas many
academic contributions do not and necessitate zero-trust.
Still, there are commonalities across domains. Both academic
and industry approaches often share fundamental goals, such as
agreeing on broad trust models for privacy protection (intermediate
and zero-trust models) or aiming for a practical digital identity
solution (trustful model). Despite these shared objectives, differing
risk perspectives lead to variations in component choices within the
overarching framework. Notably, these implementation differences
do not indicate significant changes in the framework or architecture.
Instead, adapting to address potential threats often requires simply
swapping specific components within the established structure.
The trust assumptions listed for each contribution of Tables 5
and 6 reflect the authors’ implicit threat assumptions, aligning with
the models presented in Section 4. Comparing the implemented
constraints or mitigations through the selected components and
extensions against the recommended threats for each model cate-
gory reveals that few works fully address the threats implied by
the intermediate or zero-trust models.
These discrepancies do not imply any fault in the authors’ im-
plementations; however, they do emphasize the need for explicit
threat definitions and careful consideration of the requisite exten-
sions and components. Ultimately, achieving mutual agreement on
a framework to capture SSI as well as a catalogue of threats and
mitigations available can foster a more consistent approach to SSI
across all domains.
11

Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
Krul et al.
Table 5: Academic Contributions Comparison
Selective Disclosure
Unlinkability
Non-Transferability
Credential Validity
Issuer Identification
Key and Wallet Management
Identity On-Boarding
Issuance of Sensitive Claims
Identity Owner Identification
Offline Verification
Trust Anchor
Identification
Signature
Trust Assumption
Coelho et al. [38]
Blockchain
Public Key
-
Intermediate
×
-
Know
Either
-
-
-
-
-
-
Niu and Ren [115]
Ethereum
Public Key
-
Intermediate
×
-
Know
Immediate
-
TTP
-
-
-
×
Stokkink et al. [134]
Any PKI
Public Key
ZKP
Intermediate
×

Have
Either
-
-
-
-
-
×
Laborde et al. [90]
FIDO PKI
FIDO
-
Trustful
-
-
Know
-
-
FIDO
-
-
-
×
Borse et al. [20]
Ethereum
Public Key
ZKP
Intermediate
-

Know
-
-
-
-
-
-
×
Mukta et al. [109]
Parity
DID
GGM-Merkle
Intermediate
×
-
Know
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Luecking et al. [105]
IOTA
DID
-
Zero-Trust
-
-
Know
-
-
-
-
-
Self-Publish
×
Stokkink and Pouwelse [135]
Blockchain
Public Key
ZKP
Zero-Trust
≤
-
Know
Expiry
-
MFA
-
-
Self-Publish
-
Alsayed Kassem et al. [7]
Ethereum
Public Key
-
Intermediate
×
-
Know
-
-
-
-
-
-
×
Lagutin et al. [91]
Indy
DID
-
Trustful
-
-
Know
-
-
-
-
-
Delegation
×
Abraham et al. [1]
Blockchain
DID
BLS
Intermediate
×
-
Know
Immediate
-
-
eID
-
-
-
Lee et al. [94]
Blockchain
DID
zkSNARK
Intermediate
≤

Know
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Hamer et al. [69]
Indy
DID
-
Intermediate
-

Have
Immediate
-
-
-
-
-
-
Abraham et al. [3]
Indy
DID
-
Trustful
-
-
Know
Immediate
-
-
eID
-
-
-
Schanzenbach et al. [124]
GNU Name System
Public Key
-
Zero-Trust
×
-
Know
Expiry
-
-
-
-
Self-Publish
×
Abraham et al. [2]
Blockchain
DID
BLS
Intermediate
≤
-
Know
Expiry
-
-
-
-
-

Takemiya and Vanieiev [137]
Iroha
DID
-
Intermediate
×
-
Know
-
-
-
-
-
Self-Publish
×
Cho et al. [36]
Indy
DID
CL
Intermediate
-

Know
Immediate
-
-
-
-
-
-
Gruner et al. [64]
Blockchain
-
-
Zero-Trust
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Self-Publish
-
Lauinger et al. [92]
Indy
DID
-
Intermediate
-
-
-
-
Authority
-
-
-
-
-
Chakravarty and Deshpande [30]
Blockchain
DID
-
Trustful
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Mukta et al. [110]
Fabric
DID
-
Intermediate
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Delegation
-
Bhattacharya et al. [16]
Indy
DID
-
Intermediate
-
-
Know
-
Reputation
-
-
-
-
-
Zolotavkin et al. [155]
-
-
-
Intermediate
≤

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Niya et al. [116]
Ethereum
Public Key
-
Trustful
-
-
Have
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Soltani et al. [130]
Indy
DID
-
Trustful
-
-
-
-
-
TTP
-
-
-
-
Othman and Callahan [119]
Blockchain
DID
-
Trustful
-
-
Have
-
-
-
-
-
-
×
Linklater et al. [96]
Any PKI
Public Key
-
Trustful
-
-
-
-
-
TTP + MD
-
-
Delegation

Gruner et al. [66]
Blockchain
DID
-
Zero-Trust
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Self-Publish
-
Selective Disclosure: ≤= predicate × = claim redaction Unlinkability:  = complete Offline Verification:  = supported × = prohibited ZKP: Zero-Knowledge Proof
Key and Wallet Management: MD = multi-device TTP = trusted third-party MFA = multi-factor authentication FIDO = key management offloaded to FIDO components [6]
Table 6: Credential Profiles Comparison
Identification
Credential Exchange
S.D.
Unlink.
Non-Transferability
Credential Validity
O.V.
K & W Mgmt.
Credential
Trust Anchor
Issuer
Identity Owner
Format
Signature
Trust Assumption
Hyperledger AnonCreds [79]
Indy DLT
did:indy
Link Secret
AnonCred JSON
CL
Intermediate
≤

Link Secret
AnonCreds Revocation
∼
MD / TTP / CD
JSON-LD + BoundBBS(+) [15]
CA PKI
did:web
BLS Public Key
JSON-LD
BoundBBS(+)
Intermediate
×

BLS Key
W3C Status List 2021
∼
-
JSON-LD + BBS(+) [15]
CA PKI
did:web
did:key
JSON-LD
BBS(+)
Trustful
×
-
DID Key
W3C Status List 2021
∼
-
JWT-VC [103]
Bitcoin
did:ion
did:ion
JWT-VC
ECDSA
Trustful
-
-
DID Key
W3C Status List 2021
∼
-
JWT-VC [103]
Bitcoin + CA PKI
did:web
did:ion
JWT-VC
ECDSA
Trustful
-
-
DID Key
W3C Status List 2021
∼
-
NGI Atlantic for OpenID4VCs [12]
CA PKI
did:web
did:key
JWT-VC
ECDSA
Trustful
-
-
DID Key
Epoch Expiry
∼
-
NGI Atlantic for OpenID4VCs [12]
Any PKI
did:key
did:key
JWT-VC
ECDSA
Trustful
-
-
DID Key
Epoch Expiry
∼
-
Dutch Decentralized Identity [37]
CA PKI
did:web
did:jwt
JWT-VC
ECDSA
Trustful
-
-
jwt
W3C Status List 2021
∼
-
Microsoft Entra did:web [128]
CA PKI
did:web
did:web
JWT-VC
RS256
Trustful
-
-
jwt
W3C Status List 2021
∼
-
Microsoft Entra did:ion [128]
Bitcoin
did:ion
did:ion
JWT-VC
RS256
Trustful
-
-
jwt
W3C Status List 2021
∼
-
Selective Disclosure JWT [139]
Any PKI
Any Public Key
Any Public Key
SD-JWT-VC
ECDSA
Trustful
×
-
jwt
W3C Status List 2021
∼
-
ESSIF [113]
EBSI Trust Registries
did:ebsi
did:ebsi
SD-JWT-VC
ECDSA
Trustful
×
-
DID Key
EBSI Status List
∼
-
OpenID4VC High Assurance [150]
Any PKI
Any Public Key
Any Public Key
SD-JWT-VC
ECDSA
Trustful
×
-
Any Key
JWT and CWT Status List
∼
-
ISO mDL (ISO/IEC 18013-5) [147]
x.509 + CA PKI
X.509 Public Key
COSE Public Key
MDOC
ECDSA
Trustful
×
-
Biometric and/or Device
Epoch Expiry

MD
ICAO DTC [84]
Any PKI
Any Public Key
Any Public Key
ICOA DTC
ECDSA
Trustful
-
-
Biometric and/or Passport
Cerfticate Revocation List
∼
-
x.509 [74]
Any PKI
Any Public Key
Any Public Key
x.509
ECDSA
Trustful
-
-
jwt
Cerfticate Revocation List
∼
-
IRMA (Yivi Wallet) [22]
Any PKI
Any Public Key
Link Secret
IRMA XML
CL
Intermediate
≤

Link Secret
CL Revocation

-
S.D.: Selective Disclosure Unlink.: Unlinkability O.V.: Offline Verification K & W Mgmt.: Key and Wallet Management
Selective Disclosure: ≤= predicate × = claim redaction Unlinkability:  = complete - = none Key and Wallet Management: MD = multi-device TTP = trusted third-party CW = cloud wallets Offline Verification:  = supported ∼= possible
Aggregation of Signatures, Identity On-Boarding, Issuance of Sensitive Claims, Identity Owner Identification excluded from table as no credential profile considered them.
6
OPEN WORK
Post-Quantum Resistance; Existing signature schemes em-
ployed in SSI systems, as outlined in Table 5 and 6, lack quantum-
safe resilience. This vulnerability extends beyond Layer 3 signatures
to encompass the cryptographic underpinnings of Layers 1 and 2,
potentially jeopardizing the entire cryptographic trust architecture
depicted in Figure 2. While post-quantum secure solutions have
emerged for public-key management in Layers 1 and 2, Layer 3 solu-
tions remain limited. Though Jeudy et al. [86] proposed a quantum-
secure anonymous credential scheme suitable for Layer 3 signatures,
Dutto et al. [47] highlighted the continued challenge of achieving
efficient selective disclosure (predicates or redaction).
Interoperability of Credentials; Without broad interoperabil-
ity of SSI credentials, identity owners will again be siloed into
identity systems that have chosen compatible constructions. In-
teroperability must be considered for each of the layers. Layer 1
constructions that use DIDs conforming to the standards of [133]
are, by design, interoperable. Any entity that needs to dereference a
DID can follow the specification of the defined method and collect
the standardized DIDDoc. Credential and presentation incompati-
bilities represent the most significant obstacle to interoperability.
The protocols, signatures, credential format and definitions, claims
canonicalization, and encoding methods must all be compatible.
Verifiable credentials based on JSON-LD, such as the W3C VC
Data Model [132], claim compatibility with JSON credentials [152],
12

SoK: Trusting Self-Sovereign Identity
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
but this has been disputed [148]. AnonCreds employs a proprietary
credential format [79], deviating from W3C verifiable credential
standards. The ISO 18013-5 mobile Driver’s License proposal also
adheres to a proprietary format [147].
SSI interoperability remains an ongoing challenge, and to date,
there is no definitive consensus on what this should look like. The
disparity of implementations in Tables 5 and 6 serves as evidence.
Key Management; Section 3.2.3 introduced the concept of multi-
factor authentication (via presentations). The proposal by Zhang
et al. [153] required that identity owners present their credentials
multiple times from distinct devices. This is inefficient as all that
is required is that identity owners are protected against a single
on-device wallet compromise.
In addition, the protection of keys used by issuers when signing
credentials through key rotation has been a source of contention
within the standards [71, 76]. The online nature of resolved DIDDocs
provides many methods for issuers to rotate or revoke their signing
keys. With rotation, a credential issued under a key pre-rotation is
considered valid if issued when the key was valid. Revocation of a
signing key indicates that the key has been compromised, and exist-
ing credentials signed under the key should not be accepted. This is
further complicated as assuming an issuer is malicious and holds a
compromised key, the issue date embedded in the credential cannot
be trusted. AnonCreds relies on the Layer 1 node attesting to the
issuance date, further complicating issuance and verification and
introducing further challenges to offline verification (Section 3.3.5).
Protecting these keys and their lifecycles is critical to the resilience
of SSI, and yet, there is a gap in addressing this challenge.
Transparency of Service Providers; Service providers estab-
lish trust in issuers through either pre-existing trust relationships
(using DIDs to link the trusted issuer with the credential signer)
or credential reputation (Threat 3.10). They build trust in identity
owners through the Layer 3 credential exchange. What is missing
is the transparency of service providers. Identity owners must hope
that the service provider they interact with is honest. Often, it is
up to the identity owner to evaluate the risk of disclosure.
Some discussions of digital identities, particularly those from gov-
ernment authorities, propose that the issuing entity accredit service
providers (see Australia’s proposed digital identity law [117]). How-
ever, this approach risks further siloing identities and hindering
interoperability. The current state-of-the-art for protecting identity
owners from malicious service providers offers two options: limit-
ing service providers to a pre-approved list of accredited entities or
relying on selective disclosure and unlinkability to safeguard iden-
tity owners from unfettered service providers. The effectiveness of
these measures remains uncertain, and there is a strong likelihood
that they may not be sufficient. Consider a scenario where a service
provider must collect a claim that uniquely identifies the identity
owner (i.e., a student number id) because the service provider does
not trust the identity owner, then any attempt at unlinkability
mitigation’s is destined to fail. To address this, the discussion of
Threat 3.10 introduced some mitigations (blacklisting, reputation,
and anonymity revocation) that may enable a service provider to find
trust in an unlinkable identity owner. Yet, this balance between the
competing motivations of trust and risk priorities remains under-
explored, with no clear solution to appease both parties.
Unlinkability Remains Ambiguous; Section 3.2.2 delves into
the complexities surrounding unlinkability in SSI. Correlating un-
linkability and anonymity is a typical response when presented with
unlinkability. Anonymous credentials – one of the core technolo-
gies in many SSI constructions – even bear the name. However, this
does not adequately communicate the nuances. Anonymity encom-
passes a broader scope than unlinkability. To provide anonymity
would require that the SSI construction prevent tracking of identity
owners through means beyond signatures in the presentations. Cor-
relatable identifiers can be extracted from network protocols. TOR
[46] may be able to address this in an online credential exchange;
peer-to-peer credential exchanges proposed on top of layers such
as NFC, Bluetooth, and QR Codes also face this challenge and will
require consideration if total anonymity is required.
None of this matters, if the disclosed claims place identity own-
ers in small identity, sets such that they could be profiled regardless.
It remains disputed if applications should take on the burden of
unlinkability if anonymity cannot be provided (evident by the num-
ber of credential profiles in Table 6 that provide selective disclosure
without unlinkability). At a minimum, future contributions must
clarify their position on unlinkability, communicating what level
of unlinkability their construction provides to identity owners.
7
CONCLUSION
As digital identities become unavoidable, Self-Sovereign Identity
(SSI) offers a promising direction for individual control and privacy.
Through a systematic analysis of SSI’s components and examining
trust assumptions and threats posed by various actors, we devel-
oped three distinct trust models. These models capture the diverse
levels of trust found across different SSI implementations and lit-
erature. We highlight the multifaceted nature of trust in SSI and
how various stakeholders perceive and approach trust differently.
Our comprehensive catalogue of SSI components and trust-related
design requirements serves as a valuable resource for practitioners
and researchers.
For practitioners. Practitioners tasked with designing an SSI
deployment are provided with a framework to build their construc-
tion (Section 2.1). The trust models from Section 4 define a broad
categorization and reference of the assumed risks. The catalogue of
components, design requirements, and existing implementations
in Sections 2.2, 3, and 5 may be referenced to select the appropriate
mitigations based on the specific threats identified in the chosen
trust model.
For researchers. Researchers can use this same framework and
catalogue of components to locate their work in the field of SSI.
Additionally, we support the justification of further work through
our trust models and threats and identify open, unaddressed work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work has been supported by the Cyber Security Research Cen-
tre Limited whose activities are partially funded by the Australian
Government’s Cooperative Research Centres Programme. This re-
search has been supported by an Australian Government Research
Training Program (RTP) Scholarship.
13

Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
Krul et al.
REFERENCES
[1] Andreas Abraham, Felix Hörandner, Olamide Omolola, and Sebastian Ramacher.
2020. Privacy-Preserving eID Derivation for Self-Sovereign Identity Systems. In
Information and Communications Security (Lecture Notes in Computer Science),
Jianying Zhou, Xiapu Luo, Qingni Shen, and Zhen Xu (Eds.). Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, Cham, 307–323. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-41579-
2_18
[2] Andreas Abraham, Stefan More, Christof Rabensteiner, and Felix Hörandner.
2020. Revocable and Offline-Verifiable Self-Sovereign Identities. In 2020 IEEE
19th International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and
Communications (TrustCom). IEEE, Guangzhou, China, 1020–1027. https://doi.
org/10.1109/TrustCom50675.2020.00136
[3] Andreas Abraham, Kevin Theuermann, and Emanuel Kirchengast. 2018. Quali-
fied eID Derivation Into a Distributed Ledger Based IdM System. In 2018 17th
IEEE International Conference On Trust, Security And Privacy In Computing
And Communications/ 12th IEEE International Conference On Big Data Science
And Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE). IEEE, New York, NY, USA, 1406–1412.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TrustCom/BigDataSE.2018.00195
[4] Carlisle Adams. 2011. Achieving Non-Transferability in Credential Systems
Using Hidden Biometrics. Security and Communication Networks 4, 2 (February
2011), 195–206. https://doi.org/10.1002/sec.136
[5] Christopher Allen. 2016. The Path to Self-Sovereign Identity.
https://www.
lifewithalacrity.com/article/the-path-to-self-soverereign-identity/
[6] FIDO Alliance. 2023. FIDO Alliance - Open Authentication Standards More
Secure than Passwords. https://fidoalliance.org/
[7] Jamila Alsayed Kassem, Sarwar Sayeed, Hector Marco-Gisbert, Zeeshan Pervez,
and Keshav Dahal. 2019. DNS-IdM: A Blockchain Identity Management System
to Secure Personal Data Sharing in a Network. Applied Sciences 9, 15 (July 2019),
2953. https://doi.org/10.3390/app9152953
[8] Afshan Aman, Eddie Hedges, Jace Hensley, Sam Curren, Brian Richter, Rolson
Quadras, and Juan Caballero. 2022. Wallet And Credential Interactions Editor’s
Draft. https://identity.foundation/waci-didcomm/
[9] Archiveddocs. 2016.
Securing PKI: Monitoring Public Key Infrastruc-
ture.
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/it-pro/
windows-server-2012-r2-and-2012/dn786432(v=ws.11)
[10] Rachel Arnold and Dave Longley. 2019. Zero-Knowledge Proofs Do Not Solve
the Privacy-Trust Problem of Attribute-Based Credentials: What If Alice Is
Evil? IEEE Communications Standards Magazine 3, 4 (December 2019), 26–31.
https://doi.org/10.1109/MCOMSTD.001.1900027
[11] Giuseppe Ateniese, Karyn Benson, and Susan Hohenberger. 2009. Key-Private
Proxy Re-encryption. In Topics in Cryptology – CT-RSA 2009 (Lecture Notes in
Computer Science), Marc Fischlin (Ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 279–294.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-00862-7_19
[12] NGI Atlantic. 2022. Next Generation SSI Standards | NGI Atlantic.
https:
//ngiatlantic.eu/funded-experiments/next-generation-ssi-standards
[13] auth0.com. 2023. JWT.IO. http://jwt.io/
[14] Foteini Baldimtsi and Anna Lysyanskaya. 2013. Anonymous Credentials Light.
In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer & Communica-
tions Security (CCS ’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 1087–1098. https://doi.org/10.1145/2508859.2516687
[15] Greg Bernstein and Manu Sporny. 2023. Jsonld-Signatures-Bbs. MATTR. https:
//w3c.github.io/vc-di-bbs/
[16] Manas Pratim Bhattacharya, Pavol Zavarsky, and Sergey Butakov. 2020. En-
hancing the Security and Privacy of Self-Sovereign Identities on Hyperledger
Indy Blockchain. In 2020 International Symposium on Networks, Computers and
Communications (ISNCC). IEEE, Montreal, QC, Canada, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.
1109/ISNCC49221.2020.9297357
[17] Stefano Bistarelli, Francesco Micheli, and Francesco Santini. 2023. A Survey
on Decentralized Identifier Methods for Self Sovereign Identity. In The Italian
Conference on CyberSecurity, Vol. 3488. CEUR, Bari, Italy, 1–15.
[18] Dan Boneh, Xavier Boyen, and Hovav Shacham. 2004. Short Group Signatures.
In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2004, David Hutchison, Takeo Kanade,
Josef Kittler, Jon M. Kleinberg, Friedemann Mattern, John C. Mitchell, Moni
Naor, Oscar Nierstrasz, C. Pandu Rangan, Bernhard Steffen, Madhu Sudan,
Demetri Terzopoulos, Dough Tygar, Moshe Y. Vardi, Gerhard Weikum, and Matt
Franklin (Eds.). Vol. 3152. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 41–55.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-28628-8_3
[19] Dan Boneh, Ben Lynn, and Hovav Shacham. 2001. Short Signatures from
the Weil Pairing. In Advances in Cryptology — ASIACRYPT 2001 (Lecture Notes
in Computer Science), Colin Boyd (Ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 514–532.
https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45682-1_30
[20] Yogita Borse, Anushka Chawathe, Deepti Patole, and Purnima Ahirao. 2019.
Anonymity: A Secure Identity Management Using Smart Contracts. In SSRN
Electronic Journal. SSRN, Jaipur, India, 497–504. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.
3352370
[21] David Bradbury. 2023. Unauthorized Access to Okta’s Support Case Manage-
ment System: Root Cause and Remediation. https://cms.oktaweb.dev/harfiles
[22] Privacy by Design Foundation. 2023. What Is IRMA? · IRMA Docs.
https:
//irma.app/docs/what-is-irma/
[23] Carole Cadwalladr and Emma Graham-Harrison. 2018.
Revealed: 50 Mil-
lion Facebook Profiles Harvested for Cambridge Analytica in Major Data
Breach.
https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/mar/17/cambridge-
analytica-facebook-influence-us-election
[24] Jan Camenisch, Manu Drijvers, and Anja Lehmann. 2016. Anonymous Attes-
tation Using the Strong Diffie Hellman Assumption Revisited. In Trust and
Trustworthy Computing (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), Michael Franz and
Panos Papadimitratos (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 1–20.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-45572-3_1
[25] Jan Camenisch, Markulf Kohlweiss, and Claudio Soriente. 2010. Solving Re-
vocation with Efficient Update of Anonymous Credentials. In Security and
Cryptography for Networks, David Hutchison, Takeo Kanade, Josef Kittler, Jon M.
Kleinberg, Friedemann Mattern, John C. Mitchell, Moni Naor, Oscar Nier-
strasz, C. Pandu Rangan, Bernhard Steffen, Madhu Sudan, Demetri Terzopoulos,
Doug Tygar, Moshe Y. Vardi, Gerhard Weikum, Juan A. Garay, and Roberto
De Prisco (Eds.). Vol. 6280. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 454–
471. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-15317-4_28
[26] Jan Camenisch and Anna Lysyanskaya. 2001. An Efficient System for Non-
transferable Anonymous Credentials with Optional Anonymity Revocation.
In Advances in Cryptology — EUROCRYPT 2001 (Lecture Notes in Computer
Science), Birgit Pfitzmann (Ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 93–118.
https:
//doi.org/10.1007/3-540-44987-6_7
[27] Jan Camenisch and Anna Lysyanskaya. 2002. Dynamic Accumulators and
Application to Efficient Revocation of Anonymous Credentials. In Advances in
Cryptology — CRYPTO 2002, Gerhard Goos, Juris Hartmanis, Jan Van Leeuwen,
and Moti Yung (Eds.). Vol. 2442. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
61–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45708-9_5
[28] Jan Camenisch and Anna Lysyanskaya. 2003. A Signature Scheme with Efficient
Protocols. In Security in Communication Networks (Lecture Notes in Computer
Science), Stelvio Cimato, Giuseppe Persiano, and Clemente Galdi (Eds.). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 268–289. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-36413-7_20
[29] Kim Cameron. 2005. The Laws of Identity.
[30] Dipto Chakravarty and Tushar Deshpande. 2018. Blockchain-Enhanced Identi-
ties for Secure Interaction. In 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Technologies
for Homeland Security (HST). IEEE, Woburn, MA, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/
THS.2018.8574130
[31] CHAPI. 2023. CHAPI Credential Handler API. https://chapi.io/
[32] Melissa Chase, F. Betül Durak, and Serge Vaudenay. 2023. Anonymous Tokens
with Stronger Metadata Bit Hiding from Algebraic MACs. In Advances in Cryp-
tology – CRYPTO 2023 (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), Helena Handschuh
and Anna Lysyanskaya (Eds.). Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 418–449.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38545-2_14
[33] Melissa Chase, Georg Fuchsbauer, Esha Ghosh, and Antoine Plouviez. 2022.
Credential Transparency System. In Security and Cryptography for Networks
(Lecture Notes in Computer Science), Clemente Galdi and Stanislaw Jarecki (Eds.).
Springer International Publishing, Cham, 313–335. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-031-14791-3_14
[34] Melissa Chase and Anna Lysyanskaya. 2006. On Signatures of Knowledge. In
Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2006 (Lecture Notes in Computer Science),
Cynthia Dwork (Ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 78–96. https://doi.org/10.
1007/11818175_5
[35] Zhide Chen and Li Xu. 2006. Anti-Collusion Anonymous Credentials Scheme. In
The Sixth IEEE International Conference on Computer and Information Technology
(CIT’06). IEEE, Seoul, 150–150. https://doi.org/10.1109/CIT.2006.52
[36] Kang Woo Cho, Byeong-Gyu Jeong, and Sang Uk Shin. 2021. Verifiable Cre-
dential Proof Generation and Verification Model for Decentralized SSI-Based
Credit Scoring Data. IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems E104.D, 11
(November 2021), 1857–1868. https://doi.org/10.1587/transinf.2021NGP0006
[37] Dutch Blockchain Coalition. 2023. Dutch Decentralized Identity Profile (DDIP).
DutchBlockchainCoalition. https://github.com/DutchBlockchainCoalition/DIIP
[38] Pedro Coelho, Andre Zuquete, and Helder Gomes. 2018.
A Propose for a
Federated Ledger for Regulated Self-Sovereignty. In 2018 13th Iberian Con-
ference on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI). IEEE, Caceres, 1–4.
https://doi.org/10.23919/CISTI.2018.8399301
[39] Antea Cule. 2023. Louisiana Age Verification Law: Challenges and Solutions.
[40] Sam Curren, Tobias Looker, Oliver Terbu, Kyle Den Hartog, Baha Shaaban,
Drummond Reed, Steve McCown, Troy Ronda, George Aristy, Vyacheslav Gud-
kov, Alexander Shcherbakov, Alexander Martynov, Daniel Buchner, Devin Fisher,
Orie Steele, Brian Richter, Juan Caballero, Lior Margalit, Timo Glastra, Andrew
Whitehead, Nader Helmy, Markus Sabadello, Patrick McClurg, Stephen Curran,
Daniel Hardman, and Moe Jangda. 2023. DIDComm Messaging Specification v2
Editor’s Draft. https://identity.foundation/didcomm-messaging/spec/
[41] Ivan Damgård. 2002. On Σ-protocols. Lecture Notes, University of Aarhus,
Department for Computer Science (2002), 84.
[42] Alex Davidson, Ian Goldberg, Nick Sullivan, George Tankersley, and Filippo
Valsorda. 2018. Privacy Pass: Bypassing Internet Challenges Anonymously.
14

SoK: Trusting Self-Sovereign Identity
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2018, 3 (June 2018), 164–180.
https://doi.org/10.1515/popets-2018-0026
[43] Liesje Demuynck, Bart De Decker, and Wouter Joosen. 2007. A Credential-
Based System for the Anonymous Delegation of Rights. In New Approaches for
Security, Privacy and Trust in Complex Environments, Hein Venter, Mariki Eloff,
Les Labuschagne, Jan Eloff, and Rossouw Von Solms (Eds.). Vol. 232. Springer
US, Boston, MA, 169–180. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-72367-9_15
[44] Kyle Den Hartog. 2022. Indy DID Method. https://hackmd.io/@kdenhartog/
S1eUS2BQw
[45] Oskar Deventer, Christian Lundkvist, Márton Csernai, Kyle Den Hartog, Markus
Sabadello, Dan Gisolfi, Mike Varley, Sven Hammann, John Jordan, Lovesh
Harchandani, Devin Fisher, Tobias Looker, Brent Zundel, Stephen Curran, De-
nis Rybas, and Alexander Shcherbakov. 2023. Peer DID Method Specification.
https://identity.foundation/peer-did-method-spec/
[46] Roger Dingledine, Nick Mathewson, and Paul Syverson. 2004. Tor: The {Second-
Generation} Onion Router. In 13th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security
04). USENIX Association, San Diego, CA, 18.
[47] Simone Dutto, Davide Margaria, Carlo Sanna, and Andrea Vesco. 2022. Toward a
Post-Quantum Zero-Knowledge Verifiable Credential System for Self-Sovereign
Identity.
[48] EBSI. 2023. DID Method for Legal Entities. https://hub.ebsi.eu/vc-framework/
did/did-methods/legal-entities
[49] EBSI. 2023. Issuer Trust Model | EBSI Hub. https://hub.ebsi.eu/vc-framework/
trust-model/issuer-trust-model
[50] EBSI. 2023. Overview of EBSI’s Revocation Methods | EBSI Hub. https://hub.
ebsi.eu/vc-framework/credential-status-framework/revocation-methods
[51] Jens Ernstberger, Jan Lauinger, Fatima Elsheimy, Liyi Zhou, Sebastian Steinhorst,
Ran Canetti, Andrew Miller, Arthur Gervais, and Dawn Song. 2023. SoK: Data
Sovereignty. In 2023 IEEE 8th European Symposium on Security and Privacy
(EuroS&P). IEEE Computer Society, Delft, Netherlands, 122–143. https://doi.
org/10.1109/EuroSP57164.2023.00017
[52] Decentralized Identity Foundation. 2023. Decentralized-Identity/Ion. Decen-
tralized Identity Foundation. https://github.com/decentralized-identity/ion
[53] Decentralized Identity Foundation. 2023. Ethr DID Resolver. Decentralized Iden-
tity Foundation. https://github.com/decentralized-identity/ethr-did-resolver
[54] IOTA Foundation. 2023. IOTA. https://www.iota.org
[55] IRMA Foundation. 2023. IRMA. https://privacybydesign.foundation/irma-en/
[56] Sovrin Foundation. 2018. Sovrin: A Protocol and Token for Self Sovereign
Identity and Decentralized Trust.
https://sovrin.org/wp-content/uploads/
Sovrin-Protocol-and-Token-White-Paper.pdf
[57] Sovrin Foundation. 2019. Sovrin Glossary V3. https://sovrin.org/wp-content/
uploads/Sovrin-Glossary-V3.pdf
[58] Josh Fruhlinger. 2020. Equifax Data Breach FAQ: What Happened, Who Was
Affected, What Was the Impact? https://www.csoonline.com/article/567833/
equifax-data-breach-faq-what-happened-who-was-affected-what-was-the-
impact.html
[59] Georg Fuchsbauer, Christian Hanser, and Daniel Slamanig. 2019. Structure-
Preserving Signatures on Equivalence Classes and Constant-Size Anonymous
Credentials. Journal of Cryptology 32, 2 (April 2019), 498–546. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00145-018-9281-4
[60] Subodh Gangan. 2015. A Review of Man-in-the-Middle Attacks. https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.1504.02115 arXiv:1504.02115 [cs]
[61] John H. Gerdes, Chin-Tser Huang, and Mohamed A. Sharaf. 2017. Incorporating
Biometrics into Veiled Certificates: Preventing Unauthorized Use of Anonymous
Certificates. Electronic Commerce Research 17, 2 (June 2017), 289–316. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s10660-016-9222-y
[62] Christian Gribneau, Michael Prorock, Orie Steele, Oliver Terbu, Mike Xu, and
Dmitri Zagidulin. 2023. Did:Web Method Specification. https://w3c-ccg.github.
io/did-method-web/
[63] W3C JSON-LD Working Group. 2023. JSON-LD - JSON for Linking Data. https:
//json-ld.org/
[64] Andreas Gruner, Alexander Muhle, Tatiana Gayvoronskaya, and Christoph
Meinel. 2018. A Quantifiable Trust Model for Blockchain-Based Identity Man-
agement. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and
IEEE Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical
and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData). IEEE, Halifax,
NS, Canada, 1475–1482. https://doi.org/10.1109/Cybermatics_2018.2018.00250
[65] Andreas Grüner, Alexander Mühle, Niko Lockenvitz, and Christoph Meinel. 2023.
Analyzing and Comparing the Security of Self-Sovereign Identity Management
Systems through Threat Modeling. International Journal of Information Security
22, 5 (Oct. 2023), 1231–1248. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10207-023-00688-w
[66] Andreas Gruner, Alexander Muhle, and Christoph Meinel. 2019. Using Proba-
bilistic Attribute Aggregation for Increasing Trust in Attribute Assurance. In
2019 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI). IEEE, Xiamen,
China, 633–640. https://doi.org/10.1109/SSCI44817.2019.9003094
[67] Jorge Guajardo, Bart Mennink, and Berry Schoenmakers. 2010. Anonymous
Credential Schemes with Encrypted Attributes. In Cryptology and Network
Security, Swee-Huay Heng, Rebecca N. Wright, and Bok-Min Goi (Eds.). Vol. 6467.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 314–333.
https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-17619-7_22
[68] Ulrich Haböck and Stephan Krenn. 2019. Breaking and Fixing Anonymous
Credentials for the Cloud. In Cryptology and Network Security, Yi Mu, Robert H.
Deng, and Xinyi Huang (Eds.). Vol. 11829. Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 249–269. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-31578-8_14
[69] Tom Hamer, Kerry Taylor, Kee Siong Ng, and Alwen Tiu. 2019. Private Digital
Identity on Blockchain. CEUR 2599 (2019), 7.
[70] Daniel
Hardman.
2019.
Aries-Rfcs/Concepts/0207-Credential-Fraud-
Threat-Model/README.Md
·
Hyperledger/Aries-Rfcs.
https:
//github.com/hyperledger/aries-rfcs/blob/main/concepts/0207-credential-
fraud-threat-model/README.md
[71] Daniel Hardman. 2020. Need to Clarify Revocation vs. Rotation · Issue #386 ·
W3c/Did-Core. https://github.com/w3c/did-core/issues/386
[72] Daniel Hardman. 2020. No Paradox Here: ZKPs Deliver Savvy Trust.
https:
//dhh1128.github.io/zkpcreds//trust-paradox-rebuttal.html
[73] Tim Hinchliffe. 2022. WEF Pushes Digital ID, CBDC, ESG & Crackdowns on
’Misinformation’: Future Focus Report. https://www.sociable.co/business/wef-
digital-id-cbdc-esg-misinformation-future-focus-report/.
[74] R Housley, W Ford, W Polk, and D Solo. 1999. Internet X.509 Public Key
Infrastructure Certificate and CRL Profile. https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2459.txt
[75] Carly Huitema, Daniel Bachenheimer, Darrell O’Donnell, Drummond Reed,
Jacques Bikoundou, Judith Fleenor, Kaliya Young, Karen Hand, Karl Kneiss, John
Jordan, Lynn Bendixsen, P. A. Subrahmanyam, Sankarshan Mukhopadhyay,
Scott Perry, Victor Syntez, Vikas Malhotra, and Wenjing Chu. 2021. Introduction
to Trust Over IP. https://trustoverip.org/wp-content/uploads/Introduction-to-
ToIP-V2.0-2021-11-17.pdf
[76] Hyperledger. 2020. Issuer Key Rotation | Anoncreds Design.
https://github.
com/hyperledger/indy-node/blob/main/design/anoncreds.md
[77] Hyperledger. 2022. Hyperledger/Aries-Rfcs. Hyperledger. https://github.com/
hyperledger/aries-rfcs
[78] Hyperledger. 2023. AnonCreds Revocation. Hyperledger. https://github.com/
hyperledger/anoncreds-revocation
[79] Hyperledger. 2023. AnonCreds Specification. Hyperledger. https://github.com/
hyperledger/anoncreds-spec
[80] Hyperledger. 2023. Hyperledger Fabric. https://hyperledger-fabric.readthedocs.
io/en/latest/index.html
[81] Hyperledger. 2023. Hyperledger Indy - Hyperledger Indy - Hyperledger Foun-
dation. https://wiki.hyperledger.org/display/indy
[82] Hyperledger. 2023. Hyperledger Iroha. https://iroha.readthedocs.io/en/main/
[83] Hyperledger. 2023. Indy SDK. Hyperledger. https://github.com/hyperledger/
indy-sdk
[84] Subgroup of the New Technologies Working Group (NTWG) ICAO Technical
Advisory Group on the Traveller Identification Programme (TAG/TRIP). 2020.
Guiding Core Principles for the Development of a Digital Travel Credential
(DTC).
https://www.icao.int/Security/FAL/TRIP/PublishingImages/Pages/
Publications/Guiding%20core%20principles%20for%20the%20development%
20of%20a%20Digital%20Travel%20Credential%20%20%28DTC%29.PDF
[85] Russell Impagliazzo and Sara Miner More. 2003. Anonymous Credentials with
Biometrically-Enforced Non-Transferability. In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM
Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society. ACM, Washington, DC, 60–71.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1005140.1005150
[86] Corentin Jeudy, Adeline Roux-Langlois, and Olivier Sanders. 2022. Lattice
Signature with Efficient Protocols, Application to Anonymous Credentials.
[87] Don Johnson, Alfred Menezes, and Scott Vanstone. 2001. The Elliptic Curve
Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA). International Journal of Information
Security 1, 1 (01 Aug 2001), 36–63. https://doi.org/10.1007/s102070100002
[88] Stephan Krenn, Thomas Lorünser, Anja Salzer, and Christoph Striecks. 2018.
Towards Attribute-Based Credentials in the Cloud. In Cryptology and Network
Security, Srdjan Capkun and Sherman S. M. Chow (Eds.). Vol. 11261. Springer
International Publishing, Cham, 179–202. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
02641-7_9
[89] Andre Kudra, Torsten Lodderstedt, Paul Bastian, Mirko Mollik, Maaike van
Leuken, and Caspar Roelofs. 2023. Credential Comparison Matrix.
https:
//github.com/vcstuff/credential-profile-comparison
[90] Romain Laborde, Arnaud Oglaza, Samer Wazan, Francois Barrere, Abdelmalek
Benzekri, David W. Chadwick, and Remi Venant. 2020. A User-Centric Identity
Management Framework Based on the W3C Verifiable Credentials and the
FIDO Universal Authentication Framework. In 2020 IEEE 17th Annual Consumer
Communications & Networking Conference (CCNC). IEEE, Las Vegas, NV, USA,
1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/CCNC46108.2020.9045440
[91] Dmitrij Lagutin, Yki Kortesniemi, Nikos Fotiou, and Vasilios A. Siris. 2019.
Enabling Decentralised Identifiers and Verifiable Credentials for Constrained
IoT Devices Using OAuth-based Delegation. In Proceedings 2019 Workshop on
Decentralized IoT Systems and Security. Internet Society, San Diego, CA, 6. https:
//doi.org/10.14722/diss.2019.23005
[92] Jan Lauinger, Jens Ernstberger, Emanuel Regnath, Mohammad Hamad, and
Sebastian Steinhorst. 2021. A-PoA: Anonymous Proof of Authorization for
15

Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
Krul et al.
Decentralized Identity Management. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on
Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC). IEEE, Sydney, Australia, 1–9.
https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICBC51069.2021.9461082
[93] Mohamed Layouni and Hans Vangheluwe. 2007. Anonymous K-Show Creden-
tials. In Public Key Infrastructure, Javier Lopez, Pierangela Samarati, and Josep L.
Ferrer (Eds.). Vol. 4582. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 181–192.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-73408-6_13
[94] Jeonghyuk Lee, Jaekyung Choi, Hyunok Oh, and Jihye Kim. 2021. Privacy-
Preserving Identity Management System.
[95] Shu Yun Lim, Omar Bin Musa, Bander Ali Saleh Al-Rimy, and Abdullah Almasri.
2022. Trust Models for Blockchain-Based Self-Sovereign Identity Management:
A Survey and Research Directions. In Advances in Blockchain Technology for
Cyber Physical Systems, Yassine Maleh, Lo’ai Tawalbeh, Saad Motahhir, and
Abdelhakim Senhaji Hafid (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 277–
302. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93646-4_13
[96] Gregory Linklater, Christian Smith, Alan Herbert, and Barry Irwin. 2018. Toward
Distributed Key Management for Offline Authentication. In Proceedings of the
Annual Conference of the South African Institute of Computer Scientists and
Information Technologists. ACM, Port Elizabeth South Africa, 10–19.
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3278681.3278683
[97] Michael Lodder and Daniel Hardman. 2023.
Sovrin DID Method Specifi-
cation.
https://sovrin-foundation.github.io/sovrin/spec/did-method-spec-
template.html
[98] T Lodderstedt, K Yasuda, and T Looker. 2023. OpenID for Verifiable Credential
Issuance.
https://openid.net/specs/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-
1_0.html
[99] Dave Longley and Manu Sporny. 2023. Bitstring Status List v1.0.
https:
//www.w3.org/TR/vc-bitstring-status-list/
[100] Dave Longley and Manu Sporny. 2023. Verifiable Credential Data Integrity 1.0.
https://w3c.github.io/vc-data-integrity/
[101] Dave Longley, Dmitri Zagidulin, and Manu Sporny. 2022. The Did:Key Method
v0.7. https://w3c-ccg.github.io/did-method-key/
[102] Tobias Looker and Paul Bastian. 2023. JWT and CWT Status List. Internet Draft
draft-looker-oauth-jwt-cwt-status-list-01. Internet Engineering Task Force.
[103] Tobias Looker, Andrew Hughes, David Waite, Jacob Yanicak, Valerie Lanard,
Daniel Godbout, Rohit Gulati, Eric Kuhn, Jeremie Miller, Oliver Terbu, and Niels
Klomp. 2023. JWT VC Presentation Profile. https://identity.foundation/jwt-vc-
presentation-profile/
[104] T. Looker, V. Kalos, A. Whitehead, and M. Lodder. 2023.
The BBS Signa-
ture Scheme.
https://identity.foundation/bbs-signature/draft-irtf-cfrg-bbs-
signatures.html
[105] Markus Luecking, Christian Fries, Robin Lamberti, and Wilhelm Stork. 2020. De-
centralized Identity and Trust Management Framework for Internet of Things.
In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC).
IEEE, Toronto, ON, Canada, 1–9.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICBC48266.2020.
9169411
[106] David Paul Maher. 1996. Crypto Backup and Key Escrow. Commun. ACM 39, 3
(March 1996), 48–53. https://doi.org/10.1145/227234.227241
[107] Deepak Maram, Harjasleen Malvai, Fan Zhang, Nerla Jean-Louis, Alexander
Frolov, Tyler Kell, Tyrone Lobban, Christine Moy, Ari Juels, and Andrew Miller.
2021. CanDID: Can-Do Decentralized Identity with Legacy Compatibility, Sybil-
Resistance, and Accountability. In 2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
(SP). IEEE, San Francisco, CA, 1348–1366. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP40001.2021.
00038
[108] Alexander Mühle, Andreas Grüner, Tatiana Gayvoronskaya, and Christoph
Meinel. 2018. A Survey on Essential Components of a Self-Sovereign Identity.
Computer Science Review 30 (November 2018), 80–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cosrev.2018.10.002
[109] Rahma Mukta, James Martens, Hye-young Paik, Qinghua Lu, and Salil S. Kanhere.
2020. Blockchain-Based Verifiable Credential Sharing with Selective Disclosure.
In 2020 IEEE 19th International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in
Computing and Communications (TrustCom). IEEE, Guangzhou, China, 959–966.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TrustCom50675.2020.00128
[110] Rahma Mukta, Hye-Young Paik, Qinghua Lu, and Salil S. Kanhere. 2022.
CredTrust: Credential Based Issuer Management for Trust in Self-Sovereign
Identity. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain). IEEE,
Espoo, Finland, 334–339. https://doi.org/10.1109/Blockchain55522.2022.00053
[111] Nitin Naik and Paul Jenkins. 2020. uPort Open-Source Identity Management Sys-
tem: An Assessment of Self-Sovereign Identity and User-Centric Data Platform
Built on Blockchain. In 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Systems Engineer-
ing (ISSE). IEEE, Vienna, Austria, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSE49799.2020.
9272223
[112] Toru Nakanishi and Takeshi Kanatani. 2018. An Efficient Blacklistable Anony-
mous Credential System with Reputation Using Pairing-Based Accumulator.
In 2018 17th IEEE International Conference On Trust, Security And Privacy In
Computing And Communications/ 12th IEEE International Conference On Big
Data Science And Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE). IEEE, New York, NY, USA,
1140–1148. https://doi.org/10.1109/TrustCom/BigDataSE.2018.00158
[113] NGI. 2022. eSSIF-Lab. https://essif-lab.eu/
[114] Anca Nitulescu. 2020. Zk-SNARKs: A Gentle Introduction.
[115] Jianlin Niu and Zhiyu Ren. 2021. A Self-Sovereign Identity Management Scheme
Using Smart Contracts. MATEC Web of Conferences 336 (2021), 08005. https:
//doi.org/10.1051/matecconf/202133608005
[116] Sina Rafati Niya, Benjamin Jeffrey, and Burkhard Stiller. 2020. KYoT: Self-
sovereign IoT Identification with a Physically Unclonable Function. In 2020
IEEE 45th Conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN). IEEE, Sydney, NSW,
Australia, 485–490. https://doi.org/10.1109/LCN48667.2020.9314816
[117] Commonwealth of Australia. 2023. Australia’s Digital ID Bill.
https://www.
digitalidentity.gov.au/digital-id-bill
[118] Singtel Optus. 2022. Optus Notifies Customers of Cyberattack Compromising
Customer Information.
[119] Asem Othman and John Callahan. 2018. The Horcrux Protocol: A Method for
Decentralized Biometric-based Self-sovereign Identity. In 2018 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 1–7.
https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN.2018.8489316
[120] Christian Paquin and Greg Zaverucha. 2023. U-Prove Cryptographic Specifica-
tion V1.1. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/
2016/02/U-Prove20Cryptographic20Specification20V1.1.pdf
[121] José Parra Moyano and Omri Ross. 2017. KYC Optimization Using Distributed
Ledger Technology. Business & Information Systems Engineering 59, 6 (Dec.
2017), 411–423. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-017-0504-2
[122] David Pointcheval and Olivier Sanders. 2017. Reassessing Security of Random-
izable Signatures.
[123] Abylay Satybaldy, Mariusz Nowostawski, and Jørgen Ellingsen. 2020. Self-
Sovereign Identity Systems. In Privacy and Identity Management. Data for Better
Living: AI and Privacy: 14th IFIP WG 9.2, 9.6/11.7, 11.6/SIG 9.2.2 International
Summer School, Windisch, Switzerland, August 19–23, 2019, Revised Selected
Papers, Michael Friedewald, Melek Önen, Eva Lievens, Stephan Krenn, and
Samuel Fricker (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 447–461. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-42504-3_28
[124] Martin Schanzenbach, Georg Bramm, and Julian Schutte. 2018. reclaimID:
Secure, Self-Sovereign Identities Using Name Systems and Attribute-Based
Encryption. In 2018 17th IEEE International Conference On Trust, Security And
Privacy In Computing And Communications/ 12th IEEE International Conference
On Big Data Science And Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE). IEEE, New York,
NY, 946–957. https://doi.org/10.1109/TrustCom/BigDataSE.2018.00134
[125] M Schanzenbach, C Grothoff, and B Fix. 2023. The GNU Name System. https:
//lsd.gnunet.org/lsd0001/
[126] Frederico Schardong and Ricardo Custódio. 2022. Self-Sovereign Identity: A
Systematic Review, Mapping and Taxonomy. Sensors 22, 15 (January 2022), 5641.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s22155641
[127] Vincent Schlatt, Johannes Sedlmeir, Simon Feulner, and Nils Urbach. 2022. De-
signing a Framework for Digital KYC Processes Built on Blockchain-Based
Self-Sovereign Identity. Information & Management 59, 7 (Nov. 2022), 103553.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2021.103553
[128] Microsoft Security. 2023.
Microsoft Entra Verified ID | Microsoft Secu-
rity.
https://www.microsoft.com/en-ca/security/business/identity-access/
microsoft-entra-verified-id
[129] S.S.Y. Shim, Geetanjali Bhalla, and Vishnu Pendyala. 2005. Federated Identity
Management. Computer 38, 12 (December 2005), 120–122. https://doi.org/10.
1109/MC.2005.408
[130] Reza Soltani, Uyen Trang Nguyen, and Aijun An. 2019. Practical Key Recovery
Model for Self-Sovereign Identity Based Digital Wallets. In 2019 IEEE Intl Conf on
Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing, Intl Conf on Pervasive Intelligence
and Computing, Intl Conf on Cloud and Big Data Computing, Intl Conf on Cyber
Science and Technology Congress (DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech). IEEE,
Fukuoka, Japan, 320–325.
https://doi.org/10.1109/DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/
CyberSciTech.2019.00066
[131] Reza Soltani, Uyen Trang Nguyen, and Aijun An. 2021. A Survey of Self-
Sovereign Identity Ecosystem. Security and Communication Networks 2021 (July
2021), e8873429. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/8873429
[132] Manu Sporny, Dave Longley, and David Chadwick. 2022. Verifiable Credentials
Data Model v1.1. https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/
[133] Manu Sporny, Dave Longley, Markus Sabadello, Drummond Reed, Orie Steele,
and Christopher Allen. 2022. Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) v1.0.
https:
//www.w3.org/TR/did-core/
[134] Quinten Stokkink, Georgy Ishmaev, Dick Epema, and Johan Pouwelse. 2021.
A Truly Self-Sovereign Identity System. In 2021 IEEE 46th Conference on Local
Computer Networks (LCN). IEEE, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 1–8. https://doi.org/
10.1109/LCN52139.2021.9525011
[135] Quinten Stokkink and Johan Pouwelse. 2018. Deployment of a Blockchain-
Based Self-Sovereign Identity. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Internet
of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Communications (Green-
Com) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart
Data (SmartData). IEEE, Halifax, NS, 1336–1342.
https://doi.org/10.1109/
Cybermatics_2018.2018.00230
16

SoK: Trusting Self-Sovereign Identity
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024(3)
[136] P. Syverson. 1994. A Taxonomy of Replay Attacks [Cryptographic Protocols]. In
Proceedings The Computer Security Foundations Workshop VII. IEEE, Franconia,
NH, 187–191. https://doi.org/10.1109/CSFW.1994.315935
[137] Makoto Takemiya and Bohdan Vanieiev. 2018. Sora Identity: Secure, Digital
Identity on the Blockchain. In 2018 IEEE 42nd Annual Computer Software and
Applications Conference (COMPSAC). IEEE, Tokyo, Japan, 582–587. https://doi.
org/10.1109/COMPSAC.2018.10299
[138] Parity Technologies. 2023. Blockchain Infrastructure for the Decentralised Web
| Parity Technologies. https://www.parity.io/
[139] Oliver Terbu and Daniel Fett. 2023. SD-JWT-based Verifiable Credentials (SD-
JWT VC). Internet Draft draft-terbu-oauth-sd-jwt-vc-00. Internet Engineering
Task Force.
[140] O Terbu, T Lodderstedt, K Yasuda, A Lemmon, and T Looker. 2022. OpenID Con-
nect for Verifiable Presentations. https://openid.net/specs/openid-4-verifiable-
presentations-1_0.html
[141] Stefano Tessaro and Chenzhi Zhu. 2023. Revisiting BBS Signatures.
[142] Ivonne Thomas and Christoph Meinel. 2009. Enhancing Claim-Based Identity
Management by Adding a Credibility Level to the Notion of Claims. In 2009
IEEE International Conference on Services Computing. IEEE, Bangalore, India,
243–250. https://doi.org/10.1109/SCC.2009.66
[143] Andrew Tobin. 2018. Sovrin: What Goes on the Ledger? , 12 pages.
https:
//sovrin.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/What-Goes-On-The-Ledger.pdf
[144] Patrick P. Tsang, Man Ho Au, Apu Kapadia, and Sean W. Smith. 2008. PEREA: To-
wards Practical TTP-free Revocation in Anonymous Authentication. In Proceed-
ings of the 15th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security. ACM,
Alexandria Virginia USA, 333–344. https://doi.org/10.1145/1455770.1455813
[145] V. Valos. 2023. Bound BBS Signatures. https://basileioskal.github.io/bbs-bound-
signatures/draft-bound-bbs-signatures.html
[146] Elena Wolz, Matthias Gottlieb, and Hans Pongratz. 2021. Digital Credentials
in Higher Education Institutions: A Literature Review. In Innovation Through
Information Systems (Lecture Notes in Information Systems and Organisation),
Frederik Ahlemann, Reinhard Schütte, and Stefan Stieglitz (Eds.). Springer
International Publishing, Cham, 125–140. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
86800-0_9
[147] Lucy Yang and Kaliya Young. 2023. Where Can the W3C VCs Meet the ISO
18013–5 mDL? https://medium.com/@identitywoman-in-business/where-can-
the-w3c-vcs-meet-the-iso-18013-5-mdl-b2d450bb19f8
[148] Kristina Yasuda. 2023. Kristina Yasuda | LinkedIn. https://www.linkedin.com/
feed/update/urn:li:activity:7089289609011990528/
[149] K Yasuda, M Jones, and T Lodderstedt. 2023. Self-Issued OpenID Provider V2.
https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-self-issued-v2-1_0.html
[150] K Yasuda and T Lodderstedt. 2023. OpenID4VC High Assurance Interoperability
Profile with SD-JWT VC. https://vcstuff.github.io/oid4vc-haip-sd-jwt-vc/draft-
oid4vc-haip-sd-jwt-vc.html
[151] Kaliya Young. 2021. Verifiable Credentials Flavors Explained. https://www.lfph.
io/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Verifiable-Credentials-Flavors-Explained.pdf
[152] Kaliya Young. 2023.
Misinformation Stops Here: W3C VC 2.0 Supports
JSON.
https://identitywoman.net/misinformation-stops-here-w3c-vc-2-0-
supports-json/
[153] Zhiyi Zhang, Michał Król, Alberto Sonnino, Lixia Zhang, and Etienne Rivière.
2021. EL PASSO: Efficient and Lightweight Privacy-preserving Single Sign
On. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2021, 2 (April 2021), 70–87.
https://doi.org/10.2478/popets-2021-0018
[154] Xiaoyang Zhu and Youakim Badr. 2018. Identity Management Systems for the
Internet of Things: A Survey Towards Blockchain Solutions. Sensors 18, 12
(December 2018), 4215. https://doi.org/10.3390/s18124215
[155] Yevhen Zolotavkin, Jongkil Jay Jeong, Veronika Kuchta, Maksym Slavnenko, and
Robin Doss. 2022. Improving Unlinkability of Attribute-based Authentication
through Game Theory. ACM Transactions on Privacy and Security 25, 2 (March
2022), 12:1–12:36. https://doi.org/10.1145/3501260
[156] Yixin Zou and Florian Schaub. 2018. Concern But No Action: Consumers’
Reactions to the Equifax Data Breach. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’18). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3170427.3188510
[157] Brent Zundel. 2021. Why the Verifiable Credentials Community Should Con-
verge on BBS+. https://www.evernym.com/blog/bbs-verifiable-credentials/.
A
METHODOLOGY
We started our systematization with the seed article The Path to
Self-Sovereign Identity by Allen [5]. References to this article were
collected through ResearchRabbit4. These articles were filtered and
included if they met the following requirements:
4https://researchrabbitapp.com/
(1) The work proposed an SSI implementation.
(2) or; the work proposed a feature for an existing SSI imple-
mentation.
(3) or; the work met the prior two requirements for some close
adjacent field.
We also defined the following hard exclusion requirements:
(1) The work did not propose any SSI features or implementa-
tions.
(2) or; the work discussed a use case of SSI, that is, an imple-
mentation of existing SSI tooling for a specific scenario.
(3) or; the work was purely focused on cryptographic protocols
without practical application.
(4) or; on point 3 from the inclusion requirements, the adjacent
implementation did not have a clear analog to SSI (federa-
tions, PKI, authentication without attributes).
We collected all of the selected papers’ references and citations
from the same database and repeated the filtering process. We
continued these steps until the filtering converged.
This systematization resulted in two broad categories of SSI
work: academic literature and industry implementations. We in-
cluded extra consideration for the latter with additional sources of
industry credential profiles5 as they have received more attention
in development and deployment in recent years than purely aca-
demic discussions. Losing their contributions would not provide a
complete image of the state-of-the-art.
5https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rwot11-the-hague/blob/master/draft-
documents/credential-profile-comparison.md
17
