Trust Services & Digital Wallets: Moving to the Cloud and Remote Identity Proofing | ENISA
Trust Services & Digital Wallets: Moving to the Cloud and Remote Identity Proofing
Back to News
News Item
Jun 12,2023
In order to address the cybersecurity questions of remote identity proofing, the European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) organised a workshop to support the area of Trust Services and Digital Wallets and published a report on moving trust services to the cloud.
Report on Trust Services: Secure Move to the Cloud of the eIDAS ecosystem
For the purpose of the report, ENISA conducted a survey with more than 120 stakeholders from over 29 countries in the EU and globally. The survey allowed to get an insight of practical experiences of Trust Service Providers, Conformity Assessment Bodies, Supervisory Bodies and Cloud Service Providers regarding the transition of trust services to the cloud.
Moving trust services to the cloud must be understood as an ongoing process that has to be followed step by step. While some services – such as the validation of signatures, registered delivery, time stamp or signature preservation – are moved rather quickly, other services – such as the issuance of certificates and remote control over the signing device – require in-depth analysis and preparation. The transition of data to the cloud has to be secure at all times and, in the best case, must remain in the data centre of the trust services provider.
This report has given a detailed overview of the issues to be addressed for such a transition, including the related challenges, impediments and opportunities.
Workshop on Remote Video Identification: Attacks and Foresight
The workshop was the occasion for ENISA to publish its report exploring the secure move to the cloud of the eIDAS ecosystem. In cooperation with the European Competent Authorities for Trust Services (ECATS) expert group, ENISA organised a workshop on 10 May 2023 in Amsterdam, Netherlands. The purpose of the workshop was to explore and discuss the latest national implementations, existing and emerging attacks, and the security measures envisaged for the protection of remote identity proofing across the EU.
Over 100 participants attended the workshop and included representatives from Supervisory Bodies, Identity and trust service providers, conformity assessment bodies, standardisation bodies and research community.
The workshop addressed the following main challenges:
lack of EU legislation harmonisation;
how to keep up with technological advancements connected to AI;
the testing and performance measuring landscape;
how to continuously follow the supply chain of products and services.
Access the workshop’s summary and presentations here
Meeting of the European Competent Authorities for Trust Services (ECATS) Expert Group
The Dutch Supervisory Authority hosted the 21
st
meeting of the ECATS on 11 and 12 May, back-to-back with the meeting of
FESA
(Forum of European Supervisory Authorities).
The group discussed latest developments in eIDAS2, the connection between the upcoming implementation of the NIS 2 and eIDAS2, as well as updates on standardisation and certification in relation to trust services.
The
ECATS EG
is the informal group focusing to facilitates voluntary and informal collaboration between competent authority experts from EU Member States, European Economic Area (EEA) and European Free Trade Association (EFTA) States, EU Candidate countries and other relevant stakeholders to ensure smooth and secure functioning of trust services.
Save the date for the next Trust Services and eID Forum
The Trust Services Forum will be renamed Trust Services and eID Forum and its 9
th
edition will take place on 11 -12 October 2023 in Vienna, Austria back-to-back with the 15
th
Certificate Authority (CA) Day.
Further Information
Trust Services-Secure move to the cloud of the eIDAS ecosystem - ENISA report 2023
ENISA topic on Trust Service
ENISA topic on Incident Reporting
Remote ID Proofing — ENISA (europa.eu)
Security Framework for Qualified Trust Service Providers – ENISA report 2021
The electronic identification and trust services for electronic transactions in the internal market Directive (
eIDAS regulation
)
Contact
For press questions and interviews, please contact
press (at) enisa.europa.eu
Share this page
Image
Contact
For press questions and interviews, please contact: press@enisa.europa.eu.
Access to the press office
Related topics
Digital Identity and Data Protection
Content written for:
Private Sector
Related content
Publications
Events
News
Remote ID Proofing - Good practices
12 March, 2024
Through this report, ENISA aims to enhance stakeholder awareness, facilitate risk analysis in evolving threat landscapes, and bolster trustworthiness in remote identity proofing methods.
Engineering Personal Data Protection in EU Data Spaces
26 January, 2024
Common European data spaces (EU data spaces) are a novel concept introduced in the European strategy for data and elaborated further within the Data Governance Act (DGA).
Digital Identity Standards
03 July, 2023
This report gives an overview of the most important standards and standardisation organisations in this area.
Trust Services-Secure move to the cloud of the eIDAS ecosystem
12 June, 2023
This report includes a detailed analysis on the different technical requirements that must be addressed considering the relevant standards.
BROWSE ALL PUBLICATIONS
Trust Services and eID Forum - CA Day 2026
2026
Sep 15
Engineering Data Protection in the wake of PQC
2025
Dec 8
Annual Privacy Forum (APF) 2025
2025
Oct 22
Trust Services and eID Forum - CA Day 2025
2025
Sep 24
BROWSE ALL EVENTS
ENISA advances the certification of EU Digital Wallets
News Item
03 April, 2026
ENISA launches a public consultation on the draft candidate EU Digital Wallet certification scheme, subsequent to the scheme’s development with the dedicated Ad Hoc Working Group.
Securing Personal Data in the Wake of AI
News Item
01 June, 2023
This year’s Annual Privacy Forum focused on pressing personal data protection challenges raised by the ever faster-paced developments witnessed today in digital technologies and legislative initiatives.
Trust Service Forum 2022: Deepdive into Digital Identity Wallets and Web Certificates
News Item
09 November, 2022
The European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) gathered experts from trust services providers, standardisation bodies and national authorities around the discussion tables of the Trust Services Forum organised on 27 and 28 October in Berlin.
The Annual Privacy Forum (APF) celebrates its first 10 years, as the links between privacy protection & cybersecurity continue to grow
News Item
24 June, 2022
Artificial Intelligence (AI), data sharing and privacy-by-design were the top data protection and cybersecurity topics at the APF 2022 in Warsaw.
BROWSE ALL NEWS
Subscribe
Stay updated with ENISA!
Sign up for email alerts on publications, events, vacancies,
              and more.
Sign up now