  
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DIGITAL ECONOMY MINISTERS MEETING 
 
Outcome Document & Chair’s Summary 
 
 
Bengaluru, Karnataka 
August 19, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
2 
G20 Digital Economy Ministers Meeting 
Bengaluru, August 19, 2023 
 
Outcome Document and Chair’s Summary 
 
The Outcome Document comprises the entire text, which was unanimously agreed to by all 
G20 members, except for Paragraph 24 which pertains to the Chair’s Summary 
 
Introduction 
 
1. We, the G20 Ministers responsible for the digital economy, met on 19 August 2023, 
at Bengaluru to deepen our discussions on digital innovation and inclusion, digital 
skilling, and security in the digital economy. 
 
2. We recognise the importance of creating an enabling, inclusive, open, fair, non-
discriminatory, and secure digital economy. In the context of digital economy, we 
also respect applicable legal frameworks. We take cognizance of the critical role 
played by digital technologies in helping the world navigate the myriad challenges 
posed by the COVID-19 pandemic and the lack of technological and financial 
capacity in many countries to develop and deploy well-designed, inclusive, secure, 
trusted, resilient, sustainable, open, safe, and interoperable digital systems that 
respect human rights to unleash the potential of the digital economy. Therefore, 
we acknowledge the importance of adopting an inclusive, sustainable, 
development-oriented and human-centric approach that protects privacy and 
data, to respond to various challenges and leverage opportunities of digitalisation.  
 
3. We acknowledge that digital divides, including the gender digital divide, are a 
considerable challenge for all countries, especially in developing and least 
developed countries. Noting our deliberations to bridge the digital divides 
undertaken during previous G20 presidencies, we reaffirm the urgency to 
accelerate inclusive digital transformation for all, especially for underserved 
groups and people in vulnerable situations. 
 
4. We recognise that the availability and accessibility of high-quality digital 
connectivity based on sustainable, high-performance, secure and resilient digital 
infrastructure is critical for the future. Building on G20 achievements over the 
years, we reaffirm our commitment to bridge connectivity gaps, and encourage 
the goal of promoting universal and affordable access to connectivity for all. While 
we continue to welcome global efforts towards universal connectivity, we seek to 
collectively work towards making connectivity more meaningful, by empowering 
users and maximising the benefits of the Internet for all in order to facilitate 
economic growth and sustainable development. 
 
5. We recognise that accessible, inclusive, secure, and safe digital systems have the 
potential to drive the economy of the future and catalyse growth, innovation, 
education, and sustainable development. We also reaffirm the importance of 

  
 
3 
security in the digital economy as a key enabling factor and recognise that digital 
skilling initiatives can accelerate the growth of the digital economy. 
 
A. Digital Public Infrastructure for Digital Inclusion and Innovation:  
 
6. Under the Indian Presidency’s initiative, we recognise that digital public 
infrastructure, hereinafter referred to as DPI, is described as a set of shared digital 
systems that should be secure and interoperable, and can be built on open 
standards and specifications to deliver and provide equitable access to public and 
/ or private services at societal scale and are governed by applicable legal 
frameworks and enabling rules to drive development, inclusion, innovation, trust, 
and competition and respect human rights and fundamental freedoms. 
Considering the diverse approaches of G20 members to digital transformation, we 
recognize that DPI is an evolving concept that may not be limited to sets of digital 
systems with these characteristics and could be tailored to specific country 
contexts and can be referred to with different terminologies. 
 
7. Meaningful connectivity can be enhanced through human-centric, development-
oriented, sustainable, scalable, secure, accessible, and inclusive digital systems, 
such as DPI, that have demonstrated their potential. As technological 
advancements continue to offer opportunities to transform public and private 
sector service delivery, DPI offers a promising approach to digital transformation 
by providing a shared technology infrastructure that can be built and leveraged 
by both the public and private sectors. During the COVID-19 pandemic, DPI 
demonstrated its effectiveness by enabling easier access and delivery of services 
through innovative public and private sector solutions. When developing, 
deploying, and governing DPI we note the importance of prioritising secure and 
inclusive approaches that respect human rights and protect personal data, 
privacy, and intellectual property rights. For this, we recognise the importance of 
governance frameworks and institutional capabilities that seek to ensure that DPI 
is safe, secure, trusted, accountable, and inclusive. We also recognise the role DPI 
can play in furthering meaningful connectivity and accelerating progress toward 
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and achieving 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
 
8. We underline the importance of sharing domestic experiences and learnings in the 
development and deployment of DPI, within and beyond the G20, to fully harness 
the opportunities offered by DPI and provide reference to other countries, 
including Low-and-Middle-Income Countries (LMICs). Towards this, we welcome 
the G20 Framework for Systems of Digital Public Infrastructure (Annexure 1), 
a voluntary and suggested framework for the development, deployment, and 
governance of DPI. The framework covers the technology as well as non-
technology components, which include governance and community, along with 
the suggested principles for building robust, inclusive, human-centric, and 
sustainable DPI. We also note that the framework provides flexibility to G20 
members and other countries in terms of choice of technology and approaches to 
DPI. We affirm the importance of ensuring appropriate levels of privacy and data 

  
 
4 
protection in accordance with applicable legal frameworks. We take cognisance of 
some of the basic DPI for domestic purposes, such as digital identity, digital 
payment systems, and data-sharing mechanisms with consent wherever 
applicable, among others, which can enable secure identification, fast and reliable 
payments, and seamless exchange of data/information respectively. They can also 
act as foundational layers across sectors like health, agriculture, manufacturing, 
and education among others.  
 
9. Within the context of DPI, we recognise the importance of promoting open-source 
software, open Application Programming Interfaces (API) and the standards that 
support them, including open standards, to enable different DPI systems to 
communicate, with cross-border interoperability as a long-term goal. We reaffirm 
the importance of enabling cross-border data flows and data free flow with trust, 
while respecting applicable legal frameworks. In this context, while reaffirming 
the role of data for development, we highlight the work carried out in this topic by 
the Development Working Group during the Indian Presidency. 
 
10. Acknowledging the growing demand and financing for DPI implementation in 
LMICs, we recognise the need for a comprehensive, multistakeholder approach 
with coordinated and voluntary financing and technical assistance, while ensuring 
adequate monitoring of progress and impact. We also acknowledge that the lack 
of adequate safeguards, sustained financing, and technical assistance can result in 
poorly developed DPI leading to several risks including data breaches and privacy 
violations, improper and unlimited access to personal data, violation of 
intellectual property rights, and security risks. In view of this, we underline the 
need to embrace global multistakeholder approaches, to build capacity, and 
provide technical assistance and adequate funding support for implementing 
robust, inclusive, human-centric, and sustainable DPI in LMICs. In this regard, we 
note the discussion initiated by the Indian Presidency on its proposal of the One 
Future Alliance (OFA), a voluntary initiative that aims to bring together 
governments, the private sector, academic and research institutions, donor 
agencies, civil society organisations and other relevant stakeholders and existing 
mechanisms to synergize global efforts in the DPI ecosystem. 
 
11. We acknowledge the existing gap in information and knowledge sharing on DPI. 
To bridge this gap, we recommend strengthening ongoing efforts and building 
upon existing registries. Towards this, we welcome India’s plan to build and 
maintain a Global Digital Public Infrastructure Repository (GDPIR), a virtual 
repository of DPI voluntarily shared by G20 members and beyond. The repository 
aims to share the practices and experiences of development and deployment of 
DPI which may include relevant tools and resources in different countries. 
 
B. Building Safety, Security, Resilience and Trust in the Digital Economy: 
 
12. Given the significant growth of the digital economy and the need for promoting 
safety, trust, reliability, resilience and protecting privacy and data, we affirm that 

  
 
5 
security in the digital economy is an increasing priority for all countries and 
stakeholders. 
 
13. Under the 2017 German G20 Presidency, we acknowledged that trust and security 
were essential to harness the potential of the digital economy. These values were 
reaffirmed in 2018, 2019, and 2020 under the Argentine, Japanese, and Saudi 
Arabian G20 Presidencies, respectively. Further, during the 2020 Saudi Arabian 
G20 Presidency and 2021 Italian G20 Presidency, we recognised that security in 
the digital economy is a key enabling factor for sustainable development and 
growth. We continued the discussion under the Indonesian G20 Presidency in 
2022 on the existing practices on digital security as a key enabler to support 
business continuity.  
 
14. We recognise that digital solutions have become key enablers for service delivery 
in health, finance, education, manufacturing, public services, and utilities among 
other important sectors of the economy. Safety, security, resilience, and trust 
within the digital economy are vital to advance digital transformation and 
effectively harness the opportunities and address various challenges it presents.  
 
15. We also recognise that global interconnectedness and digital dependencies across 
sectors and borders can create shared security risks associated with the digital 
economy that a single entity may not be capable of addressing alone. The digital 
economy has multiple layers, and, therefore, there is a risk that breaches or 
incidents at any layer may disrupt the functioning of the whole ecosystem. Due to 
the borderless nature of the digital environment, it is important for the G20 
members and beyond to share their approaches and good practices to build a safe, 
secure, and resilient digital economy.  
 
16. We acknowledge that preventing and mitigating security threats to the digital 
economy depends on stakeholders’ capacities to understand, anticipate, prepare 
for, and respond to these threats. Therefore, we endeavour to further a common 
understanding of security risk management for the continuity of businesses, 
including Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), in the digital economy. 
To this end, we welcome the non-binding G20 High-Level Principles to Support 
Businesses in Building Safety, Security, Resilience, and Trust in the Digital 
Economy (Annexure 2A) which draw from the practices, strategies and tools 
developed and implemented by G20 members. These principles seek to 
strengthen resilience in the digital economy by promoting a culture of security, 
capacity building, multi-stakeholder cooperation and supporting research and 
development.  
 
17. We recognise the potential risks associated with the digital economy and their 
impact on society, particularly children and youth. Considering that the digital 
environment opens new avenues for children and the youth to explore their 
creativity, enhance their learning experience, and work collaboratively, we 
acknowledge that the increased access to digital tools and services can increase 
exposure to a spectrum of risks to which children are especially vulnerable, such 

  
 
6 
as, cyberbullying and grooming, and child sexual abuse and exploitation as well as 
risks related to their personal data and privacy. We also recognise that women 
and girls are disproportionately affected by technology facilitated gender-based 
violence. In 2021, under the Italian G20 Presidency, we adopted High Level 
Principles for Children Protection and Empowerment in the Digital Environment. 
We reaffirm that cyber education and cyber awareness for the protection and 
empowerment of children and youth in the digital ecosystem, including protecting 
their best interests and respecting human rights in the digital environment 
continues to be one of our key priority areas.  
 
18. We welcome the Indian Presidency’s G20 Toolkit on Cyber Education and Cyber 
Awareness of Children and Youth1 (Annexure 2B) that recognises the important 
role of the UN Convention on Rights of the Child and the need to develop holistic, 
human-centric approaches to address online safety across different jurisdictions 
which promote respect for and facilitate governments’ efforts to protect children's 
privacy and personal data, uphold children’s dignity, and respect their rights.  
 
C. Digital Skilling for Building a Global Future Ready Workforce: 
 
19. We recognise that the increasing digital skill gaps among our societies, economies 
and the workforce can be disruptive for the digital economy and result in 
increasing digital divides, particularly for women and girls. Therefore, we resolve 
to enhance our collective efforts to promote digital skills and digital literacy with 
a focus on addressing digital divides and skill gaps, including gender skill gaps, 
through skilling, reskilling, upskilling and other capacity building initiatives. In 
this regard, we reaffirm our support for the efforts made by the 2016 Chinese, 
2017 German, 2018 Argentine and 2022 Indonesian G20 Presidencies. The 2023 
Indian Presidency builds on the fourth pillar of the toolkit proposed by Indonesia, 
i.e., ‘jobs’ in the digital economy.  
  
20. Supporting a gender equal workforce and the acquisition of digital skills ranging 
from basic to advanced are key to promoting inclusive and sustainable 
development. Designing and promoting inclusive education, training programs 
and other learning opportunities, particularly for underserved groups and people 
in vulnerable situations, can contribute to reducing the digital skill gap. Therefore, 
we recognise the importance of identifying the relevant skill sets and bridging the 
information gap between job seekers, employers, education and training 
institutions, and civil society actors.  
 
21. Given that digital technologies are changing the skills needed for any job, we 
recognise the need to upskill and reskill the workforce with the relevant technical 
and socio-emotional, or transversal skills. The digital era also calls for the need to 
equip the workforce with skills to ensure human centric and privacy friendly 
design, development, and use of these technologies. We thus welcome the G20 
 
1 The document “G20 Toolkit for Cyber Education and Cyber Awareness for Children and Youth” was produced by the Indian G20 
Presidency and is based on the responses provided by the G20 members and guest countries to the Cyber Security Questionnaire 
circulated by the Indian Presidency. Annexure 2B contains a brief summary of this toolkit.  
 

  
 
7 
Toolkit for Designing and Introducing Digital Upskilling and Reskilling 
Programs2 (Annexure 3A) which outlines an indicative strategy for the design 
and implementation of digital upskilling and reskilling programs. The toolkit 
further identifies a number of good practices related to the skilling, upskilling, and 
reskilling and serves as a resource to help better assess and improve strategies 
towards building a future-ready workforce.  
 
22. We acknowledge that many G20 members have established taxonomies and 
endowment frameworks based on skills, occupations, professional certifications, 
or job roles. However, there is a lack of a widespread measurement of skills, 
abilities and competencies enabling cross-country comparisons, as observed 
during the G20 Argentine Presidency (2018). Therefore, we recognise that there 
is a need for a common understanding of digital skills across borders to potentially 
tap into a broader talent pool and help address the supply and demand gap of a 
digitally skilled workforce. We thus, welcome the G20 Roadmap to Facilitate the 
Cross-Country Comparison of Digital Skills (Annexure 3B). This roadmap is a 
series of broad steps that seeks to enable a common understanding of job roles, 
digital skills, and related credentials among G20 member states and beyond.  
 
23. Based on voluntary engagements, we also recognise the value of the Indian 
Presidency’s proposal to develop a virtual Centre of Excellence (CoE) which would 
be built and maintained by UNESCO as a repository of good practices on digital 
skilling initiatives, occupational standards, skill taxonomies, professional 
certifications, skill credentials, and studies related to demand and supply gaps, 
especially related to digital skills and would aim to exchange relevant information 
and encourage learning from interested countries’ approaches.  
 
D. Geopolitical Issues 
 
24. This year, we have also witnessed the war in Ukraine further adversely impact the 
global economy. There was a discussion on the issue. We reiterated our national 
positions as expressed in other fora, including the UN Security Council and the UN 
General Assembly, which, in Resolution No. ES-11/1 dated 2 March 2022, as 
adopted by majority vote (141 votes for, 5 against, 35 abstentions, 12 absent) 
deplores in the strongest terms the aggression by the Russian Federation against 
Ukraine and demands its complete and unconditional withdrawal from the 
territory of Ukraine. Most members strongly condemned the war in Ukraine and 
stressed it is causing immense human suffering and exacerbating existing 
fragilities in the global economy – constraining growth, increasing inflation, 
disrupting supply chains, heightening energy and food insecurity, and elevating 
financial stability risks. There were other views and different assessments of the 
situation and sanctions. Recognising that the G20 is not the forum to resolve 
 
2 The document “G20 Toolkit for Designing and Introducing Digital Upskilling and Reskilling Programs” was produced by the Indian 
G20 Presidency and is based on the responses provided by the G20 members and guest countries to the Digital Skilling Questionnaire 
circulated by the Indian Presidency. Annexure 3A contains a brief summary of this toolkit.  

  
 
8 
security issues, we acknowledge that security issues can have significant 
consequences for the global economy.3 4  
 
25. It is essential to uphold international law and the multilateral system that 
safeguards peace and stability. This includes defending all the Purposes and 
Principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and adhering to 
international humanitarian law, including the protection of civilians and 
infrastructure in armed conflicts. The use or threat of use of nuclear weapons is 
inadmissible. The peaceful resolution of conflicts, efforts to address crises, as well 
as diplomacy and dialogue, are vital. Today's era must not be of war. 
 
Way forward 
 
26. We affirm that our deliberations and outcomes on Digital Public Infrastructure for 
Digital Inclusion and Innovation; Building Safety, Security, Resilience and Trust in 
the Digital Economy; and Digital Skilling for Building a Global Future-Ready 
Workforce seek to advance our collective efforts to build an enabling, inclusive, 
open, fair, non-discriminatory, and secure digital economy. In the context of digital 
economy, we respect applicable legal frameworks. We also seek to foster a digital 
economy that promotes respect for human rights, privacy, and protection of 
personal data for all, and contributes to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development and achievement of Sustainable Development Goals.  
 
27. We are grateful to all G20 members and guest countries for their contributions to 
the G20 Digital Economy Working Group (DEWG) under the Indian presidency. 
We would also like to thank the international organisations and our knowledge 
partners i.e., ITU, OECD, UNDP, UNESCO, and World Bank who contributed and 
provided valuable feedback towards achieving the outcomes. 
 
28. Brazil, as the next Presidency of the G20, looks forward to building upon the 
achievements of past presidencies in order to continue to promote an inclusive, 
sustainable, development-oriented and human-centric approach, with the 
fundamental aims of realising the full potential of the digital economy for all, 
improving people's lives and bridging the digital divides. We therefore welcome 
Brazil’s plans to work on the topics of universal and meaningful connectivity; 
artificial intelligence; information integrity and trust in the digital environment; 
and digital government.  
 
29. We believe that the outcomes of this Ministerial meeting would be a useful 
resource and could continue to contribute actively to the work of future 
presidencies and work collectively to realise the benefits of the global digital 
economy. 
***** 
 
 
3 Russia rejected the inclusion of geopolitical Para 24, on the basis that it does not conform to the G20 mandate and recognizes the 
status of the Para 24 as Chair’s Summary. Russia agrees with the rest of the text. 
4 China stated that the G20 DEMM is not the right forum to discuss geopolitical issues and did not support the inclusion of the 
geopolitical-related content.  

  
 
9 
ANNEXURE 1 
 
G20 FRAMEWORK FOR SYSTEMS OF DIGITAL PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
1. Digital public infrastructure represents a promising approach towards 
digitalisation, which leverages a whole-of-society approach to provide benefits 
across sectors. Considering the diverse approaches of G20 members to digital 
transformation, we recognize that digital public infrastructure is an evolving 
concept that may not be limited to sets of digital systems with these characteristics 
and could be tailored to specific country contexts and can be referred to with 
different terminologies. Under the Indian Presidency’s initiative, digital public 
infrastructure is described as a set of shared digital systems, the key idea behind 
which is designing minimal digital building blocks that can be used modularly by 
governments, businesses, academia, and civil society to enable society-wide 
development. The ‘public’ in digital public infrastructure can refer to public 
benefit and access, subject to appropriate governance and oversight by public 
authorities. We recommend consideration of the following elements in the 
development and deployment of these systems.  
 
a. Three components: technology, governance, and community. 
 
b. Suggested principles for (development and deployment). 
 
2. This voluntary and suggested framework is developed as neutral reference that 
recognizes that choice of technology and models will be determined by country 
contexts.  
 
a. THREE COMPONENTS: TECHNOLOGY, GOVERNANCE AND COMMUNITY 
 
3. Technology: This comprises digital systems and applications (e.g., software 
codes, protocols, standards) that are interoperable. These building blocks provide 
a stand-alone, reusable service or set of services. They can be used flexibly for 
different use cases and sectors. These can be open source and/or proprietary 
solutions, as well as a combination of both.  
 
4. Governance: Governance is critical in facilitating user adoption at scale by 
establishing trust. Governance frameworks may include rules of engagement 
governing stakeholder behaviour, cross-cutting and domain specific norms, laws 
and policies, and governance embedded into digital technologies (for e.g., privacy 
enhancing technologies). It provides safeguards, including those that promote 
respect for human rights and protection of personal data, privacy, and intellectual 
property, as well as accessible and transparent grievance redressal mechanisms. 
Governance frameworks may also include accountable institutions for 
maintaining oversight on its design, deployment, and implementation. It may also 
seek to ensure long-term funding to ensure sustained and uninterrupted 
operations. 
 

  
 
10 
5. Community: Vibrant and inclusive community participation can enable value 
creation. This also comprises private sector and civil society actors who can 
collaborate to unleash innovation and unlock value. 
 
6. SUGGESTED PRINCIPLES 5: TECHNOLOGY, GOVERNANCE AND COMMUNITY 
 
a. Inclusivity: Eliminate or reduce economic, technical, or social barriers to 
enable inclusion, empowerment of end-users, last-mile access, and avoid 
erroneous algorithmic bias. 
b. Interoperability: Enable interoperability by using and building on open 
standards and specifications with a technology neutral approach, wherever 
possible, while accounting for appropriate safeguards and keeping in view the 
legal considerations and technical constraints.  
c. Modularity and Extensibility: Extensible approach implies a building block 
or modular architecture to accommodate changes/modifications without 
undue disruption.  
d. Scalability: Use flexible design to easily accommodate any unexpected 
increase in demand and / or to meet expansion requirements without 
changing existing systems. 
e. Security and Privacy: Adopt an approach that embeds key privacy enhancing 
technologies and security features within the core design to ensure individual 
privacy, data protection, and resilience based on standards offering 
appropriate levels of protection.  
f. Collaboration: Encourage the participation of community actors at different 
stages of planning, designing, building, and operating to facilitate and promote 
a culture of openness and collaboration. Enable the development of user-
centric solutions and facilitate widespread and sustained adoption and allow 
innovators to develop new services.  
g. Governance for Public Benefit, Trust, and Transparency: Maximise public 
benefit, trust, and transparency while respecting applicable legal frameworks. 
This means that laws, regulations, policies, and capabilities should seek to 
ensure that these systems are safe, secure, trusted and transparently 
governed, and also promote competition, and inclusion, and adhere to 
principles of data protection and privacy. 
h. Grievance redress: Define accessible and transparent mechanisms for 
grievance redress, i.e., user touchpoints, processes, responsible entities, with 
a strong focus on actions for resolution. 
i. Sustainability: Ensure sustainability through adequate financing and 
technological support and enhancements to facilitate uninterrupted 
operations and seamless user-focused service delivery. 
j. Human rights: Adopt an approach that respects human rights at every stage 
of the planning, designing, building, and operating. 
 
5 The aim of these Principles is to build upon the advancements in this domain, such as the Principles on Identification for Sustainable 
Development, the CPMI-IOSCO Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures, UN Principles for Responsible Digital Payments, and 
the Principles for Digital Development. 
 

  
 
11 
k. Intellectual Property Protection: Provide adequate and effective protection 
and enforcement of intellectual property rights for the rights-holders of 
technologies and other materials used based on existing legal frameworks.  
l. Sustainable Development: Seek to develop and deploy these systems that 
contribute to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development and achievement of Sustainable Development Goals. 
 
ENABLERS OF INNOVATION, GROWTH, AND INCLUSION 
 
7. Leveraging digital technologies for economic activities often necessitates certain 
basic functions. These can include the ability to identify and authenticate 
individuals and businesses and secure and seamless flow of money and 
information. Digital public infrastructure can fulfil these core functionalities 
through interoperable digital systems, such as: digital ID, digital payment systems, 
and data sharing mechanisms with consent wherever applicable in line with the 
principles as described in Para 6 above. Some of these core functions are described 
below: 
a. Identification: The ability for people and businesses to securely verify their 
identity, as well as complementary trust services such as electronic 
signatures and verifiable credentials. 
b. Payments: Easy and instant transfer of money between people, businesses, 
and governments. 
c. Data sharing with consent wherever applicable: Seamless flow of personal 
data with consent, wherever applicable, across public and the private 
sectors, with safeguards for personal data protection as per applicable data 
governance frameworks.  
 
8. Network effects of these systems can bring transformative changes in the digital 
economy as well as help countries achieve their developmental goals. 

  
 
12 
ANNEXURE 2 
 
A. G20 HIGH-LEVEL PRINCIPLES TO SUPPORT BUSINESSES IN BUILDING SAFETY, 
SECURITY, RESILIENCE, AND TRUST IN THE DIGITAL ECONOMY 
 
Recognising the importance of security in the digital economy and to support businesses, 
we endorse the following non-binding High-Level Principles to build safety, security, 
resilience, and trust in the digital economy: 
 
1. Security and Trust 
We seek to develop a human-centric culture of security and trust in the digital 
economy that enables citizens and businesses to understand risk management by: 
 
a. Promoting cyber hygiene and the development of market-led and industry-led 
standards based on the principles of openness, transparency, and consensus. 
b. Encouraging businesses and supporting MSMEs to develop and implement good 
practices and risk management frameworks to maintain the integrity of global 
supply chains. 
c. Promoting a ‘security by design’ and phased risk management approach along 
with encryption measures for digital solutions and services, including in emerging 
technologies and connected systems and their devices. 
d. Promoting resilience in connected sectors such as health, finance, manufacturing, 
and public services and utilities by taking suitable security measures. 
e. Encouraging accessible and efficient grievance redressal mechanisms for 
businesses, MSMEs, and consumers that fall victim to malicious use of digital 
technologies. 
 
2. Capacity Building 
We acknowledge that capacity building is an important aspect of advancing security 
across the multilayered structure of the digital economy and should include: 
 
a. Collaborating with and encouraging relevant stakeholders, including international 
organisations, to prioritise and contribute to capacity building within their areas 
of expertise. 
b. Exploring an interdisciplinary approach that includes strategy, governance, 
technology, regulatory and non-regulatory frameworks, culture, economics, 
incident response and crisis management. 
c. Providing guidance and awareness to citizens, businesses including MSMEs, and 
the wider economy on how to stay safe and secure online in an inclusive and 
accessible manner. 
d. Promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all users of digital technologies. 
e. Encouraging young people especially women and girls to consider a career in 
security of digital solutions and services through curricular or extracurricular 
programs. 
 
3. Research and Development 
We recognise the importance of advancing research and development to build 

  
 
13 
resilience by: 
 
a. Promoting research in advanced and emerging technologies that can enhance 
protection against security threats. 
b. Sharing best practices on how to tackle various security threats, including 
recommendations from international organisations. 
c. Facilitating research projects on topics such as the economic costs of security 
incidents and their impact on businesses and underrepresented communities. 
d. Promoting studies to measure security-related digital divides and its impact on 
economies. 
 
4. Multistakeholder Cooperation 
We recognise that partnering with businesses, civil society organisations, academia, 
international organisations and the technical community is key to promoting security 
in the digital economy and can be reinforced by: 
 
a. Developing opportunities for public private partnership collaboration and 
engagement. 
b. Supporting the sharing of trends on known and existing vulnerabilities faced by 
nongovernmental stakeholders in the digital environment. 
c. Facilitating engagement between businesses and points of contacts across various 
industry incident response teams. 
 
5. Strengthening Resilience of Essential Services 
We recognise the importance of preventing damage or disruptions to certain essential 
social and economic services in the digital economy and encourage stakeholders to: 
 
a. Take suitable measures to protect services essential to the digital economy from 
security threats. 
b. Encourage businesses to set up mechanisms to assess the security of their supply 
chains for essential services in an evidence-based approach. 
 
6. Support for MSMEs in the Security Ecosystem 
We recognise the role of MSMEs in the digital economy and support strengthening the 
MSME security ecosystem by: 
 
a. Driving innovation by supporting MSMEs that offer security solutions and services 
to scale-up and grow. 
b. Providing guidance and support to MSMEs on how to operate securely in a digital 
environment. 
c. Creating opportunities for MSMEs to engage with governments, shape policy 
approaches and share good practices to improve resilience to combat particular 
security challenges. 
d. Seeking to mobilise additional cooperation, funding, and support for MSMEs to 
improve their security capacity. 
 

  
 
14 
B. TOOLKIT ON CYBER EDUCATION AND CYBER AWARENESS OF CHILDREN AND 
YOUTH 
 
7. The close integration of digital technologies in the lives of children and youth has 
translated into various benefits, such as access to information, increased 
connectivity to online spaces, and the opportunity to learn a wide array of skill sets. 
However, as per the United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund 
(UNICEF) the surge in online activity has also led to a proliferation of cyber risks 
specifically targeting children and youth.  
 
8. International organisations such as the ITU have recognized the significance of this 
challenge and framed guidelines such as the ITU’s Guidelines on Child Online 
Protection, Guidelines for policymakers. The G20 members have explicitly 
acknowledged this challenge and opportunity. In 2021, the G20 Digital Economy 
Ministers committed to the non-binding G20 High Level Principles for Children 
Protection and Empowerment in the Digital Environment, which this toolkit builds 
upon. 
 
9. The toolkit relied on three phases of research: 
 
a. Phase 1: Empirical desk-based research that reviewed a range of publicly 
available sources on G20 countries to map information relating to the core 
research questions.  
b. Phase 2: Consultation with G20 members and obtaining direct insights through 
a questionnaire circulated in February 2023. 
c. Phase 3: Consolidation of data from mapping and consultation. 
 
10. To mitigate these risks, G20 members and guest countries have adopted and 
implemented a broad range of measures. These include comprehensive regulations 
and capacity-building measures, such as the creation of dedicated websites and 
applications. This toolkit has recorded some of these measures. We found that 
measures to further child online safety are based on a combined assessment of the 
following factors: 
 
a. The type of risk 
b. Targeted actor 
c. Implementing stakeholder  
d. Desired outcome 
 
11. This toolkit depicts this approach in a pyramidal model but acknowledges that the 
adopted measures may vary from this approach as per the social, economic, 
political and cultural contexts of a member. 
 
12. Drawing from desk research and responses to a survey circulated by the Indian 
Presidency among all the G20 members and guest countries, the toolkit shares five 
takeaways that policymakers may consider while developing cyber education and 
cyber awareness initiatives for children and youth. These include: 
 

  
 
15 
 
a. Classifying risks and responses based on sub age groups. 
b. Investing in response, referrals, and support systems. 
c. Adopting and investing in a multi-stakeholder approach throughout the 
decision-making process. 
d. Promoting global cooperation to further child online safety. 
e. Recognising the critical role of businesses and online platforms. 
 

  
 
16 
ANNEXURE 3 
 
A. G20 TOOLKIT FOR DESIGNING AND INTRODUCING DIGITAL UPSKILLING AND 
RESKILLING PROGRAMS 
 
1. Digital transformation and new technological developments are changing the way we 
live, work, and behave, deeply transforming economies and societies worldwide. 
Projections point to important shifts in the workforce due to use of automation and 
artificial intelligence technologies, both in terms of possible job losses and change in 
job profiles and job tasks. Digital skill gaps, including among women and girls, 
emerge as the key factor hampering technological development and adoption.  
 
2. Formulation of comprehensive digital skill development strategies can contribute to 
inclusive digital economies. We further recognise the need for basic and advanced 
digital skills, and associated socio-emotional or transversal6 skills, in addition to 
skills related to the responsible design, development, and deployment of digital 
technologies, for a future ready, gender equal, inclusive workforce.  
 
3. Addressing this need, we have developed the G20 Toolkit for Designing and 
Introducing Digital Upskilling and Reskilling Programs to help the design and 
implementation of digital upskilling and reskilling programmes at scale. This toolkit 
builds on the fourth pillar of the toolkit proposed by the Indonesian G20 Presidency 
in 2022, i.e., ‘jobs’ in the digital economy. 
 
4. The G20 Toolkit for Designing and Introducing Digital Upskilling and Reskilling 
Programs serves as a compendium of good practices, enabling factors, 
implementation challenges, and case studies of successfully implemented digital 
skilling programmes across G20 members and other countries. The toolkit further 
delineates an indicative and flexible strategy which can be referenced when 
developing and deploying digital skilling programmes. 
 
5. The structure of the G20 Toolkit for Designing and Introducing Digital Upskilling 
and Reskilling Programs is as follows: 
 
a. Compendium of Digital Skilling Initiatives 
 
The compendium reflects the responses received to the questionnaire circulated 
among G20 members and guest countries. It consolidates information provided by 
G20 members and guest countries on aspects including skill qualification 
frameworks, occupational standards, as well as programmes, strategies, and schemes 
for digital skilling. It highlights examples of stakeholders’ collaboration, mechanisms 
for credentials and certifications, enabling factors and challenges faced by members 
in their initiatives, and shares key lessons learnt. The case studies presented in this 
section reflect successful actions or initiatives deployed by G20 members and guest 
 
6 According to UNESCO, transversal skills are those typically considered as not specifically related to a particular job, task, academic 
discipline or area of knowledge but as skills that can be used in a wide variety of situations and work settings (IBE 2013). These skills 
are increasingly in high demand for learners to successfully adapt to changes and to lead meaningful and productive lives. Examples 
include- Critical and innovative thinking, Interpersonal skills, Intrapersonal skills, Global Citizenship, Media Literacy.  

  
 
17 
countries.  
 
b. Indicative Strategy for Designing and Introducing Digital Skilling, 
Upskilling and Reskilling Programmes  
 
The compendium is complemented by an indicative strategy for the introduction of 
digital upskilling and reskilling programs. The strategy draws from the initiatives and 
experiences of G20 members and guest countries and may be followed or built upon 
flexibly by the governments of G20 members and beyond. The proposed strategy 
entails: 
 
i. 
 Identifying key relevant emerging technologies to build a future-ready, 
gender equal workforce. 
 
ii. 
Classifying job tasks and mapping them to required digital skill sets and job 
tasks to assess upskilling and reskilling needs for current and future 
workforce.  
 
iii. 
Assessing gaps in existing digital skilling programmes to improve design 
and implementation.  
 
iv. 
Leveraging short-term training in addition to school and higher education 
curricula, to keep pace with technological developments and market needs.  
 
v. 
Investing in trainers and faculty to improve their training capacity in digital 
skills and enable the use of innovative digital technologies in pedagogy. 
 
vi. 
Developing and promoting an ecosystem of digital credentials for easier 
verifiability, accessibility, and comparability.  
 
B. ROADMAP TO FACILITATE CROSS COUNTRY COMPARISON OF DIGITAL SKILLS  
 
6. To address the need for a widespread measurement of skills, abilities and 
competencies enabling cross-country comparison already highlighted by the 
Argentine Presidency in 2018, the ‘Roadmap to Facilitate Cross Country 
Comparison of Digital Skills’ encourages countries to identify, define, and 
compare digital skills and competencies across borders, while also promoting 
workforce development in the digital economy. It seeks to establish a common 
understanding between taxonomies related to the skills needed for the digital era, 
with the aim to contribute to greater employment, innovation, and economic 
development.  
 
7. The ‘Roadmap to Facilitate the Cross-Country Comparison of Digital Skills’ builds 
on existing skills recognition frameworks. Given the diversity of approaches to 
recognising skills in different countries, the roadmap has been envisioned as a 
series of broad steps, for countries to flexibly adapt the roadmap to their specific 
contexts. The roadmap can facilitate the engagement of countries in bilateral or 

  
 
18 
multilateral dialogues to help create a common understanding of the digital skills 
needed in different job roles, in addition to tasks, qualifications, and credentials or 
professional certifications. 
 
8. By facilitating collaboration, the roadmap can help devise a coordinated approach 
to respond to digital skill demands by different industries. It seeks to help 
countries identify emerging digital skills and needs, prioritise investments in 
relevant areas, and inform upskilling and reskilling policies undertaken by 
governments and industry. 
 
Key Considerations for Cross-country Comparison 
 
9. While countries may have different approaches when it comes to recognising 
digital skills, common elements emerge. These relate to accessibility of 
information, comparability, evidence, and verifiability, which all represent 
elements enabling more effective comparisons of digital skills across borders.  
 
10.  Access to comprehensive information about the digital skilling syllabus, content, 
learning and proficiency can enable better understanding of individuals' digital 
skills, knowledge, and experience, enabling effective comparison.  
 
11.  Comparability enables the assessment and comparison of digital skill credentials, 
qualifications, experience, and proficiency across countries, ensuring that digital 
skills can be evaluated and acknowledged consistently.  
 
12.  Evidence in the form of documented proof of digital skill credentials is essential 
for comparison of digital skills. This may include professional certifications, or any 
other credentials that provide tangible evidence of an individual's digital skills.  
 
13.  Verifiability establishes the legitimacy of digital skill credentials and enables trust 
among stakeholders.  
 
14.  It is important to note that these considerations are not exhaustive, and countries 
may use any, or all of these, as a basis for cross country comparison.  
 
Key Components of the Roadmap  
 
15.  The roadmap comprises the following components:  
 
a. Identification 
and 
classification 
of 
knowledge, 
skills, 
and 
competencies in the digital era: In order to effectively perform a 
particular job, or task, it is important to identify the knowledge, skills, and 
competencies required for the digital era. These encompass digital, 
technical, and socio-emotional / transversal skills to enable responsible 
design, development, and use of technologies7. 
 
 
7 In line with UNESCO Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence (UNESCO, 2021) 

  
 
19 
b. Measurement and assessment of proficiency: The knowledge, skills and 
competencies identified need to be assessed in terms of the level of 
proficiency required. The criteria related to such assessment may be 
shared, to facilitate comparison, benchmarking, and good practices. 
 
c. Establishing suitable similarities8: Participating countries may 
collectively identify similarities in relation to skills, especially digital skills, 
qualifications, job roles and tasks, as well as required proficiency levels, 
and credentials.  
 
d. This process would enable assessment and comparison of digital skills 
across educational or professional systems to inform the design and 
implementation of upskilling and reskilling programmes and policies, in 
support of industry and employment outcomes. 
  
 
 
8 ‘Similarities’ refers to any metric (s) that a country may choose to use while comparing digital skills, competencies, credentials in 
another country. 
