Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
I, Katy Gallagher, Minister for Finance, acting as the Digital ID Data Standards Chair, make 
the following instrument.
Dated 7 November 2024
Katy Gallagher
Minister for Finance
Digital ID Data Standards Chair
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 i
Contents
Chapter 1—Preliminary 1
1.1  Name .....................................................................................................................................1
1.2  Commencement.....................................................................................................................1
1.3  Authority ...............................................................................................................................1
1.4  Definitions.............................................................................................................................1
1.5  Incorporated instruments.......................................................................................................5
1.6  Application—transitioned accredited entities .......................................................................5
Chapter 2—Data standards for ISPs 6
Part 1—Biometric testing 6
2.1  Definitions.............................................................................................................................6
2.2  Biometric testing entity .........................................................................................................6
2.3  Testing of presentation attack detection technology .............................................................7
2.4  ISP’s response to testing report.............................................................................................9
2.5  Testing of biometric matching algorithm..............................................................................9
2.6  Testing of source biometric matching.................................................................................10
2.7  Testing of eIDVT ................................................................................................................10
Part 2—Authenticating to a digital ID 14
Division 1—Authentication levels 14
3.1  Authentication levels: AL Table .........................................................................................14
Division 2—Binding authenticators to a digital ID 16
3.2  Binding an authenticator when generating a digital ID.......................................................16
Division 3—Standards for kinds of authenticators 17
3.3  Memorised secrets...............................................................................................................17
3.4  Look-up secrets ...................................................................................................................18
3.5  Single-factor one-time password devices............................................................................18
3.6  Multi-factor one-time password devices .............................................................................19
3.7  Single-factor cryptographic software ..................................................................................20
3.8  Multi-factor cryptographic software ...................................................................................21
3.9  Multi-factor cryptographic devices .....................................................................................22
3.10  Single-factor cryptographic devices..................................................................................22
3.11  Out-of-band devices ..........................................................................................................23
Division 4—Standards for security requirements 26
3.12  Standards for security requirements..................................................................................26
Division 5—Authentication using biometric information 28
3.13  Standards for authentication using biometric information................................................28
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Preliminary  Chapter 1
  
  
Section 1.1
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 1
Chapter 1—Preliminary
     
1.1  Name
This instrument is the Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024.
1.2  Commencement
This instrument commences at the same time as the Digital ID Act 2024 
commences.
1.3  Authority
This instrument is made under section 99 of the Digital ID Act 2024.
1.4  Definitions
Note 1: A number of expressions used in this instrument are defined in the Act, including the 
following:
(a) accredited entity;
(b) accredited identity service provider;
(c) authenticator;
(d) biometric information;
(e) digital ID.
Note 2: A number of expressions used in this instrument are defined in the Accreditation Rules, 
including the following:
(a) biometric matching;
(b) cryptographic key;
(c) eIDVT;
(d) presentation attack instrument;
(e) presentation attack detection;
(1) Expressions defined in the Accreditation Rules have the same meaning in this 
instrument.
(2) In this instrument:
AACA means an ASD-Approved Cryptographic Algorithm as referred to in the 
Guidelines for Cryptography published by the Australian Signals Directorate.
Note: At the time this instrument was made, the Guidelines for Cryptography are located at 
https://www.cyber.gov.au/resources-business-and-government/essential-cyber-
security/ism/cyber-security-guidelines/guidelines-cryptography.
Accreditation Rules means the Digital ID (Accreditation) Rules 2024.
Act means the Digital ID Act 2024.
AE-compromise resistance means authentication protocols that do not require an 
accredited entity to persistently store secrets that could be used for 
authentication.
AL Table: see section 3.1.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 1  Preliminary
  
  
Section 1.4
2 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
APCER means an attack presentation classification error rate.
authentication level: see section 3.1.
authenticated protected channel means a communication channel that uses 
approved cryptography where the client connection has authenticated to the 
relevant server. 
authentication protocol means a defined sequence of messages between an 
individual and an ISP where the messages authenticate the individual to their 
digital ID by demonstrating that the individual has possession and effective 
control of one or more valid authenticators that have previously been bound to 
their digital ID.
biometric sample means biometric information that is collected from an 
individual using a biometric capture device or sensor and is converted into an 
analogue or digital representation.
biometric testing entity: see subsection 2.2(2).
custom biometric capability means a biometric binding or authentication 
capability integrated with the entity’s accredited services that is distinct from an 
in-device biometric capability.
document liveness means the presence of the original physical photo ID 
credential. 
false match rate has the same meaning as in ISO/IEC 2382-37: 2022.
false non-match rate has the same meaning as in ISO/IEC 2382-37: 2022.
identity document template means a model representation of a particular identity 
document that is used to verify an acquired image of an identity document of that 
type. 
Example: The identity document template may include, but is not limited to, text locations, 
colours and other graphical elements, security features, and locations of facial 
biometric information for identity documents that are also photo IDs.  
in-device biometric capability means the built-in biometric capability provided 
by original equipment manufacturers for smartphones, including the biometric 
sensor, the presentation attack detection subsystem, and the biometric matching 
algorithm.
Example: Capabilities provided by online equipment manufacturers for smartphones include 
FaceID or Fingerprint Unlock.
ISO/IEC 17025:2017 means the standard for general requirements for the 
competence of testing and calibration laboratories, published by the International 
Organization for Standardization.
Note: At the time this instrument was made, located at 
https://www.iso.org/standard/66912.html.
ISO/IEC 19795-2:2007 means Part 2 (concerning testing methodologies for 
technology and scenario evaluation) of the series of standards designated 
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Preliminary  Chapter 1
  
  
Section 1.4
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 3
ISO/IEC 19795 (concerning biometric performance testing and reporting), 
published by the International Organization for Standardization.
Note: At the time this instrument was made, located at 
https://www.iso.org/standard/41448.html.
ISO/IEC TS 19795-9:2019 means Part 9 (concerning testing on mobile devices) 
of the series of standards designated ISO/IEC TS 19795 (concerning biometric 
performance testing and reporting), published by the International Organization 
for Standardization.
Note: At the time this instrument was made, located at 
https://www.iso.org/standard/78101.html.
ISO/IEC 2382-37:2022 means Part 37 (concerning biometrics) of the series of 
standards designated ISO/IEC 2382 (concerning vocabulary), published by the 
International Organization for Standardization.
Note: At the time this instrument was made, located at 
https://www.iso.org/standard/73514.html.
ISO/IEC 24745:2022 means the standard for biometric information protection, 
published by the International Organization for Standardization.
Note: At the time this instrument was made, located at 
https://www.iso.org/standard/75302.html.
ISO/IEC 30107-1:2023 means Part 1 (concerning framework) of the series of 
standards designated ISO/IEC 30107 (concerning biometric presentation attack 
detection), published by the International Organization for Standardization.
Note: At the time this instrument was made, located at 
https://www.iso.org/standard/83828.html.
ISO/IEC 30107-3:2023 means Part 3 (concerning testing and reporting) of the 
series of standards designated ISO/IEC 30107 (concerning biometric 
presentation attack detection), published by the International Organization for 
Standardization.
Note: At the time this instrument was made, located at 
https://www.iso.org/standard/79520.html.
ISP means an accredited identity service provider.
look-up secret means a physical or electronic record that stores a set of secrets 
shared between an individual and the accredited entity authorised to provide an 
authenticator service.  
memorised secret means a secret value chosen and memorised by the individual, 
such as a password or PIN.
MF crypto device is short for multi-factor cryptographic device.
MF crypto software is short for multi-factor cryptographic software.
MF OTP device is short for multi-factor one-time password device.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 1  Preliminary
  
  
Section 1.4
4 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
MitM means a man-in-the-middle attack whereby an adversary intercepts 
communications between 2 parties and presents themselves to each party as if the 
adversary were the other party. 
multi-factor cryptographic device means a hardware device that performs 
cryptographic operations using one or more protected cryptographic keys and 
requires activation through a second authentication factor.
Note: Although cryptographic devices contain software, they differ from cryptographic 
software authenticators in that all embedded software on the hardware device is under 
the effective control of the accredited entity providing authentication services.
multi-factor cryptographic software means a cryptographic key that is stored in 
some form of removable media or device that requires activation through a 
second authentication factor.  
multi-factor one-time password device means a device that generates OTPs as 
part of an authentication activity.
Note: This includes hardware devices and software-based OTP generators installed on 
devices such as mobile phones. The OTP is displayed on the device and input or 
transmitted by an individual, proving possession and effective control of the device.
one-time password means a password that is only valid for a single 
authentication event.
OTP is short for one-time password.
out-of-band device means a physical device that uses an alternative channel for 
transmitting information. 
phishing resistance means authentication methods implemented by an accredited 
entity for preventing and addressing impersonation attacks.
presentation attack instrument species means a class of presentation attack 
instrument created using a common production method and based on different 
biometric characteristics.
PSTN means public switched telephone network.
reauthentication means the process by which the accredited entity reconfirms 
that a session is still under the control of the individual.
replay resistance means protection against the capture of transmitted 
authentication or access control information and its subsequent retransmission 
with the intent of producing an unauthorised effect or gaining unauthorised 
access.
second-generation document image means a digital or printed image of a 
reproduced (for example, photocopied, scanned, or photographed) unedited 
genuine document.
SF crypto device is short for single-factor cryptographic device.
SF crypto software is short for single-factor cryptographic software.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Preliminary  Chapter 1
  
  
Section 1.5
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 5
SF OTP device is short for single-factor one-time password device.
single-factor cryptographic device means a hardware device that performs 
cryptographic operations using one or more protected cryptographic keys and 
authenticated by proving possession and effective control of the cryptographic 
key.
single-factor cryptographic software means a cryptographic key that is stored in 
some form of soft media.
single-factor one-time password device means a device that generates and 
displays OTPs, including hardware devices, SMS or software-based OTP 
generators installed on devices such as mobile phones. 
1.5  Incorporated instruments
If a provision of this instrument applies, adopts or incorporates, with or without 
modification, any matter contained in any other instrument or other writing 
(incorporated instrument), then the reference to the incorporated instrument is 
as in force at the commencement of this instrument.
1.6  Application—transitioned accredited entities
(1) Paragraph (b) in column 2 of item 3 of the table in section 3.13 applies to a 
transitioned accredited entity starting on the day that is 12 months after the day 
on which this instrument commences.
(2) Every provision of this instrument not specified in subsection (1) applies to a 
transitioned accredited entity in accordance with its terms and on and from the 
commencement of this instrument.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 2  Data standards for ISPs
Part 1  Biometric testing
  
Section 2.1
6 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
Chapter 2—Data standards for ISPs
Part 1—Biometric testing
2.1  Definitions
In this Part: 
document false accept rate means the proportion of document verification 
transactions with credential fraud that are incorrectly confirmed as authentic.
document false reject rate means the proportion of genuine document 
verification transactions with truthful claims of a genuine document that are 
incorrectly denied.
document fraud attack means the techniques used to create fraudulent 
documents. 
Note: Techniques can be digital or physical and can include document tampering or creation 
of a counterfeit document.
document fraud instrument means an object or image used in a credential fraud 
attack.
Example: A forged or counterfeit photo ID. 
document fraud instrument species means a class of document fraud 
instruments created using a common production method and based on different 
persons.
FIDO document authenticity verification requirements means the requirements 
developed by the FIDO (Fast Identity Online) Alliance for testing eIDVT 
solutions.
Note: At the time this instrument was made, located at 
https://fidoalliance.org/specs/idv/docauth/document-authenticity-verification-
requirements-v1.0-fd-20220815.html. 
test set has the same meaning as in section 6.2 of the FIDO document 
authenticity verification requirements.
2.2  Biometric testing entity
(1) Biometric testing must be conducted by a person that:
(a) uses personnel experienced in conducting biometric testing; 
(b) is, or uses, a laboratory accredited against ISO/IEC 17025:2017 that is 
certified for the assessment of biometric technology testing standards;
(c) has, and applies, a policy for working with human test subjects that has 
been approved by a relevant national body; 
(d) has established test methods for: 
(i) presentation attack detection testing informed by ISO/IEC 30107-
3:2023, if conducting testing of presentation attack detection 
technology; and 
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Data standards for ISPs  Chapter 2
Biometric testing  Part 1
  
Section 2.3
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 7
(ii) testing of accuracy of the biometric matching algorithm informed by 
ISO/IEC 19795-2:2007, if conducting testing of a biometric matching 
algorithm; and
(e) is independent from the design, implementation, operation and 
management of the accredited entity’s accredited services and DI data 
environment and is:
(i) external to the entity; or 
(ii) if the entity is part of a group, external to the group.
Note 1: An ISP that conducts authentication using biometric information using custom 
biometric capability must ensure its presentation attack detection technology is tested 
by a biometric testing entity—see item 4 in the table in section 3.13.
Note 2: For paragraph (d), a person accredited to conduct presentation attack detection testing 
according to ISO/IEC 30107-3:2023 and/or biometric performance testing according to 
ISO/IEC 19795-2:2007 under the National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation 
Program coordinated by the National Institute of Standards and Technology ordinarily 
would meet the requirements in that paragraph.
Note 3: For testing of eIDVT, the biometric testing entity must also meet subsection 2.7(2).
(2) A person that meets all the requirements in subsection (1) is a biometric testing 
entity.
2.3  Testing of presentation attack detection technology
(1) In this section: 
level A presentation attack instrument species means a category of presentation 
attack instruments which:
(a) have an elapsed creation time equal to or less than one day;
(b) can be created or undertaken by a layperson;
(c) can be undertaken with standard equipment; and
(d) involve a source of biometric information which is easy to obtain such as a 
photo from social media or a voice recording.
level B presentation attack instrument species means a category of presentation 
attack instruments which:
(a) have an elapsed creation time equal to or less than 7 days;
(b) can be created or undertaken by a person who has the required expertise to 
do so;
(c) can be undertaken with standard or specialised equipment; and
(d) involve a source of biometric information which is moderately difficult to 
obtain such as a stolen fingerprint image or a voice recording of a specific 
phrase.
General requirement
(2) Where an ISP conducts online biometric binding, its presentation attack detection 
technology and liveness detection must be tested by a biometric testing entity in 
accordance with the requirements specified in ISO/IEC 30107-3:2023 and this 
Part.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 2  Data standards for ISPs
Part 1  Biometric testing
  
Section 2.3
8 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
Additional requirements for testing of presentation attack detection technology
(3) Testing of presentation attack detection technology must be conducted in 
accordance with the standards in the following table.
Standards for testing of presentation attack detection technology
Item For: the standard is:
1 the testing: must comply with the following:
(a) be conducted on a system that incorporates all hardware 
and software involved in the ISP’s biometric binding 
process;
(b) be conducted using configurations and settings that 
align to the ISP’s DI data environment;
(c) calculate and record the completed presentation attack 
detection evaluation and corresponding results for each 
presentation attack instrument species as those artefacts 
and process for testing are defined by ISO/IEC 30107-
3:2023, and this section;
(d) include presentation attack instrument species to address 
potential presentation attack threats to the presentation 
attack detection technology and mechanism for liveness 
detection, as informed by the ISP’s cyber security risk 
assessment and fraud risk assessment; 
(e) include at least 6 level A presentation attack instrument 
species and at least 6 level B presentation attack 
instrument species; and 
(f) include a minimum of 10 individuals.
2 each presentation attack 
instrument species:
must create at least one presentation attack instrument 
covering a minimum of 3 individuals and must be included 
in the testing.
3 presentation attack 
instrument species used in 
testing:
(a) must meet the requirement for an APCER of 0%;
(b) however, if the reported APCER for any presentation 
attack instrument species does not meet the requirement 
in paragraph (a), the biometric testing entity must:
(i) conduct supplementary testing of any presentation 
attack instrument species that failed to meet the 
requirement in paragraph (a); and
(ii) subject to paragraph (c), confirm that the 
supplementary testing concluded that the 
presentation attack instrument species successfully 
met the requirement in paragraph (a);
(c) if up to one level B presentation attack instrument 
species used in the testing has an APCER equal to or 
less to 5%, with all other level B and level A 
presentation attack instrument species having an 
APCER of 0%, the biometric testing entity must include 
in its report to the ISP a risk rating and recommended 
mitigation strategies.
Note: For custom biometric capability, APCER must be no 
more than 10%—see paragraph (k) of item 4 in the 
table in section 3.13.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Data standards for ISPs  Chapter 2
Biometric testing  Part 1
  
Section 2.4
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 9
Standards for testing of presentation attack detection technology
Item For: the standard is:
4 the testing report and ISP’s 
response:
(a) the ISP must:
(i) obtain a copy of the testing report from the 
biometric testing entity; and
(ii) ensure the report confirms that the ISP’s 
presentation attack detection technology has been 
tested in accordance with ISO/IEC 30107-3:2023 
and this Part; and
(b) if paragraph (c) of item 3 applies, the ISP must respond 
in writing to the findings and recommendations in the 
report as required by section 2.4.
2.4  ISP’s response to testing report
For item 4 in the table in section 2.3, the ISP’s response to the testing report must 
include:
(a) for each finding and recommendation in the report:
(i) a risk matrix based on an established risk management framework; 
(ii) a risk assessment; 
(iii) a risk rating in accordance with its risk matrix; 
(iv) a response to each risk identified in the report as requiring treatment; 
and
(v) a response to each recommendation in the report; and
(b) for each risk and recommendation accepted by the ISP:
(i) details of the action the ISP will take to implement the treatment or 
recommendation; 
(ii) the timeframe in which the ISP will complete the action, having 
regard to the risk rating assigned for the risk or recommendation; and 
(iii) the residual risk rating expected following completion of the action; 
and
(c) for each risk and recommendation not accepted by the entity: 
(i) the reasons for the non-acceptance; 
(ii) details of alternative actions, if any, to be taken by the entity and the 
timeframes to do so; and
(iii) the residual risk rating expected following implementation of any 
alternative action.
2.5  Testing of biometric matching algorithm
(1) For biometric testing of technical biometric matching and eIDVT, the biometric 
matching algorithm must be tested by a biometric testing entity in accordance 
with the testing and reporting specifications described in ISO/IEC 19795-2:2007 
to determine the:
(a) failure to enrol rate;
(b) failure to acquire rate;
(c) false match rate; and
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 2  Data standards for ISPs
Part 1  Biometric testing
  
Section 2.6
10 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
(d) false non-match rate. 
(2) The biometric matching algorithm must:
(a) be tested using operational configurations and settings that are consistent 
with and align to the ISP’s operating environment;
(b) be tested having regard to the range of individuals who may be potential 
users of the ISP’s accredited services;
(c) be tested using representation from a diverse range of individuals 
mentioned in paragraph (b), including: 
(i) individuals with disability; and 
(ii) individuals with a diverse range of ability, including ability to use 
technology; and
(iii) individuals with a diverse range of age, gender and ethnicity; and
(d) establish, with a minimum 90% confidence interval, that the algorithm 
achieves a false match rate of not more than 0.01% and a false non-match 
rate of not more than 3%, as described in ISO/IEC TS 19795-9:2019. 
2.6  Testing of source biometric matching
For biometric testing of source biometric matching, the ISP must conduct 
end-to-end testing to ensure:
(a) the entity’s biometric capability, including the image quality profile 
requirements, meets the requirements of the:
(i) authoritative source; or
(ii) service that confirms the veracity of information with an authoritative 
source; and
(b) the source biometric matching works as a repeatable process.
2.7  Testing of eIDVT
(1) In this section: 
level A, level B or level C, in relation to document fraud attacks, have the 
meanings for each of those levels in section 6.2.1.2 of the FIDO document 
authenticity verification requirements.
(2) Where biometric testing is of an ISP’s eIDVT, the biometric testing entity 
conducting the testing must:
(a) be a FIDO Accredited Laboratory as defined by the FIDO document 
authenticity verification requirements;
(b) use personnel experienced in eIDVT testing; and
(c) have, and implement, policy and procedures that demonstrate responsible 
management and storage by the biometric testing entity of physical 
document fraud instruments.
FIDO document authenticity verification requirements
(3) The eIDVT must be tested according to, and meet the requirements of: 
(a) subject to paragraph (b)—rule 5.20 of the Accreditation Rules;
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Data standards for ISPs  Chapter 2
Biometric testing  Part 1
  
Section 2.7
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 11
(b) in relation to paragraph 5.20(4)(b) of the Accreditation Rules—the 
standards in the table in subsection (4);
(c) the FIDO document authenticity verification requirements; and
(d) the additional requirements to the FIDO document authenticity verification 
requirements in the following table.
Additional requirements to the FIDO document authenticity verification requirements
Item FIDO section: the additional requirement is:
1 Section 6.2 (test sets): must be reasonably balanced across document types and 
contain at least 30 of each listed document type supported 
by the eIDVT.
2 Section 7.2.2 (test crew and 
associated genuine 
documents):
the test set for physical document testing:
(a) are to be reasonably balanced across document types 
and must contain at least 10 of each listed document 
supported by the eIDVT; and
(b) the eIDVT must meet the criteria described in 3.1 of 
the FIDO document authenticity verification 
requirements (performance levels), but must achieve a 
document false reject rate of 1% or below and the 
document false accept rate of 1%, for both digital 
testing and physical document testing.
Standards for eIDVT testing for document liveness
(4) When conducting eIDVT testing, the standards in the following table apply.
Standards for eIDVT testing for document liveness requirements
Item Requirement: the standard is:
1 Inputs for digital document 
testing—for digital document 
testing:
the ISP must use:
(a) 300 images of documents for each test set (see 
section 6.2 of the FIDO document authenticity 
verification requirements); or
(b) 300 instances of the inputs the eIDVT uses to detect 
document liveness that include, but are not limited to, 
the following:
(i) short video;
(ii) two or more separate images either at different 
angles or of the reverse of the document; or
(iii) another challenge or response as required by the 
technical specifications of the eIDVT testing.
2 The images referred to in 
item 1:
must reasonably cover:
(a) varying geographics for document types the entity 
accepts for eIDVT biometric matching; and 
(b) for demographics represented on the images of the 
documents, a diverse range of individuals, including 
individuals with disability and individuals with a 
diverse range of age, gender, ability and ethnicity.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 2  Data standards for ISPs
Part 1  Biometric testing
  
Section 2.7
12 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
Standards for eIDVT testing for document liveness requirements
Item Requirement: the standard is:
3 Levels of document fraud 
attacks in scope for digital 
document testing:
the following levels of document fraud attack for digital 
document testing of document fraud instruments are within 
scope:
(a) level A attacks;
(b) level B attacks; and
(c) level C attacks.
4 Evaluations with document 
fraud instruments in digital 
testing—the test set of 
document fraud instruments 
used for digital document 
testing:
must:
(a) comply with the conditions imposed by section 6.3.2 of 
the FIDO document authenticity verification 
requirements; and
(b) contain:
(i) at least 10% of document fraud instruments at 
level A, B, and C that are genuine second-
generation document images; and
(ii) no documents that are considered to be out-of-
scope for processing through the eIDVT.
5 Levels of document fraud 
attacks in scope for physical 
testing:
the following levels of document fraud attack for physical 
testing of document fraud instruments are within scope:
(a) level A attacks; and
(b) level B attacks.
6 Test set conditions for 
physical evaluation using 
document fraud instruments:
must include:
(a) minimum of 100 document fraud instruments which 
reasonably include:
(i) varying geographics for document types the entity 
accepts for eIDVT biometric matching; and
(ii) for demographics represented on the images of 
the documents, a diverse range of individuals, 
including individuals with disability and 
individuals with a diverse range of age, gender, 
ability and ethnicity;
(b) only document fraud instruments that are reproduced 
forms of genuine documents being printed versions of 
second-generation document images;
(c) no physically tampered documents;
(d) at least 30% document fraud instruments at level A 
representing at least 3 or more document fraud 
instrument species;
(e) at least 30% document fraud instruments at level B 
representing at least 3 or more document fraud 
instrument species; and
(f) no document types that are considered out-of-scope for 
processing through the eIDVT.
7 Document verification 
transactions with physical 
document fraud instruments:
the biometric testing entity must conduct testing with 
physical document fraud instruments according to the rules 
for transactions for testing for genuine physical documents 
as set out in section 7.3.1 of FIDO document authenticity 
verification requirements.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Data standards for ISPs  Chapter 2
Biometric testing  Part 1
  
Section 2.7
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 13
Standards for eIDVT testing for document liveness requirements
Item Requirement: the standard is:
8 Metrics to be calculated for 
physical document fraud 
instruments:
the document false accept rate must be calculated in 
accordance with section 3.1.2 of FIDO document 
authenticity verification requirements.
(5) The ISP must ensure:
(a) the biometric testing entity provides it with a report; and
(b) the biometric testing entity’s report confirms that the ISP’s eIDVT has 
been tested in accordance with the requirements in this section.
(6) The ISP must maintain a list of the unique kinds of credentials accepted by the 
eIDVT for verification and the list must include:
(a) the kind of credential;
(b) the issuer of the credential; and
(c) the series or version of the kind of credential.
Note: See Schedules 1 to 4 in the Accreditation Rules for kinds of credentials.
(7) If new kinds of credentials are included in the ISP’s eIDVT for verification, the 
eIDVT must be retested in accordance with this section for those credentials.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 2  Data standards for ISPs
Part 2  Authenticating to a digital ID
Division 1  Authentication levels
Section 3.1
14 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
Part 2—Authenticating to a digital ID
Division 1—Authentication levels
3.1  Authentication levels: AL Table
The following table (AL Table): 
(a) specifies 3 authentication levels (AL1, AL2 and AL3);
(b) the kinds of authenticators that can be used for each authentication level 
(item 1);
(c) reauthentication requirements for each authentication level (item 2); 
(d) mandatory security requirements for each authentication level (items 3 
to 7), where ‘must’ stated in the column for the authentication level means 
the requirement is mandatory for that authentication level; and
(e) the allowed combinations of authentication levels and identity proofing 
levels (item 8).
AL Table
Item Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column 4
Requirement AL1 AL2 AL3
1 Kinds of 
authenticators
One of the following:
•memorised 
secret;
•look-up secret;
•SF OTP device;
•SF crypto 
software;
•SF crypto 
device;
•MF OTP device;
•MF crypto 
software;
•MF crypto 
device.
One of the following:
•MF OTP device;
•MF crypto 
software;
•MF crypto 
device; or
•a memorised 
secret and one 
the following:
olook-up 
secret;
oout-of-band 
device;
oSF OTP 
device;
oSF crypto 
software;
oSF crypto 
device.
One of the following:
•MF crypto 
device;
•SF crypto device 
and memorised 
secret; 
•SF OTP device 
and MF crypto 
software; 
•SF OTP device 
and MF crypto 
device; 
•SF OTP device 
and SF crypto 
software and 
memorised 
secret.
2 Reauthentication Where the 
authenticated session 
is persistent, the 
individual must 
reauthenticate to their 
digital ID after 30 
days. 
Where the 
authenticated session 
is persistent, the 
individual must 
reauthenticate to their 
digital ID after 12 
hours, regardless of 
Where the 
authenticated session 
is persistent, the 
individual must 
reauthenticate to their 
digital ID after 
12 hours, regardless 
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Data standards for ISPs  Chapter 2
Authenticating to a digital ID  Part 2
Authentication levels  Division 1
Section 3.1
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 15
AL Table
Item Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column 4
Requirement AL1 AL2 AL3
For reauthentication, 
the individual must 
use at least 1 
authentication factor.
user activity. 
Otherwise, the 
session must be 
terminated. 
After 30 minutes of 
inactivity, the 
individual must 
reauthenticate to their 
digital ID. Otherwise, 
the session must be 
terminated.
For reauthentication, 
the individual must 
use at least 1 
authentication factor.
For reauthentication, 
the individual must 
use a memorised 
secret or 
authentication using 
biometric 
information.
of user activity. 
Otherwise, the 
session must be 
terminated.
After 15 minutes of 
inactivity, the 
individual must 
reauthenticate to their 
digital ID. Otherwise, 
the session must be 
terminated.
For reauthentication, 
the individual must 
use both 
authentication 
factors.
Security
3 MitM resistance Must Must Must
4 Phishing 
resistance — — Must
5 AE-compromise 
resistance — — Must
6 Replay resistance — Must Must
7 Authentication 
intent — — Must
8 AL level to be 
combined with an 
identity proofing 
level
IP1  Identity proofing 
levels up to and 
including IP3.
All identity proofing 
levels
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 2  Data standards for ISPs
Part 2  Authenticating to a digital ID
Division 2  Binding authenticators to a digital ID
Section 3.2
16 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
Division 2—Binding authenticators to a digital ID
3.2  Binding an authenticator when generating a digital ID
(1) For remote transactions where generating the digital ID and binding of the 
authenticator to that digital ID cannot be completed in a single electronic 
transaction that is a single protected session:
(a) individuals must identify themselves in the binding transaction by 
presenting a temporary secret which was either established during a prior 
transaction or sent to the individual’s mobile phone number or email 
address (temporary secret); and
(b) long-term authentication secrets must be issued to an individual only 
within a protected session.
Note: Generating the digital ID and binding of the authenticator may not be completed in a 
single electronic transaction that is a single protected session where the identity 
proofing is conducted online and the individual is required to collect a physical item 
such as a lookup secret.
(2) For in-person transactions where the generation of the digital ID and binding of 
an authenticator to that digital ID cannot be completed in a single physical 
encounter within a single protected session:
(a) individuals must identify themselves in-person by either presenting a 
temporary secret, or by biometric authentication;
(b) temporary secrets must not be reused; and
(c) if the ISP issues long-term authentication secrets during an in-person 
transaction, those secrets must be loaded locally on to a physical device 
that is issued in-person to the individual or delivered in a manner that 
confirms the individual’s email address or mobile phone number.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Data standards for ISPs  Chapter 2
Authenticating to a digital ID  Part 2
Standards for kinds of authenticators  Division 3
Section 3.3
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 17
Division 3—Standards for kinds of authenticators
3.3  Memorised secrets
For memorised secrets, the standards in the following table apply.
Standards for memorised secrets
Item Requirements—If: the standard is:
1 a memorised secret is chosen 
by an individual:
must be at least 8 characters long.
2 a memorised secret is chosen 
randomly by the accredited 
entity:
must be at least 6 characters long and may be entirely 
numeric.
3 a request from an individual 
is being processed to establish 
or change a memorised 
secret:
the ISP must compare the prospective secret against a list 
that contains secrets known to be commonly used, expected 
or compromised.
Example: The list may include:
•passwords obtained from previous breach corpuses;
•dictionary words;
•repetitive or sequential characters (e.g. “aaaaaa”, 
“1234abcd”); and
•context-specific words, such as the name of the service, the 
username, and derivatives thereof.
4 the chosen secret is found in 
the list referred to in item 3:
the ISP must:
(a) notify the individual that they need to select a different 
secret;
(b) provide the reason for rejection; and
(c) require the individual to choose a different secret.
5 a memorised secret is being 
requested:
the ISP’s information technology system must use an 
AACA and an authenticated protected channel.
6 a memorised secret is being 
stored:
must be stored in a form that is resistant to offline attacks, 
including by ensuring:
(a) memorised secrets are salted and hashed using a 
suitable one-way cryptographic key derivation 
function;
(b) the salt value is at least 32 bits in length and be chosen 
arbitrarily so as to minimise salt value collisions among 
stored hashes; and
(c) both the salt value and the resulting hash are stored for 
each individual who uses memorised secrets.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 2  Data standards for ISPs
Part 2  Authenticating to a digital ID
Division 3  Standards for kinds of authenticators
Section 3.4
18 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
3.4  Look-up secrets
For look-up secrets, the standards in the following table apply.
Standards for look-up secrets
Item Requirements—If: the standard is:
1 a look-up secret is delivered 
to an individual:
must be delivered in a secure manner.
2 a look-up secret is requested 
from the individual:
the individual must be prompted for the next secret from the 
individual’s authenticator or for a specific secret.
3 a look-up secret is given to an 
individual:
must only be used successfully once.
4 the lookup secret is derived 
from a grid card:
each cell of the grid must be used only once.
5 a look-up secret is stored: must be stored in a form that is resistant to offline attacks, 
including by ensuring:
(a) look-up secrets are hashed using an AACA; and
(b) for look-up secrets that have less than 112 bits of 
entropy—the look up secret is salted before being 
hashed with a salt value that is at least 32 bits in length 
and arbitrarily chosen so as to minimise salt value 
collisions among stored hashes.
6 an individual uses look-up 
secrets: 
must store both the salt value and the resulting hash for 
each individual referred to in item 5.
7 the ISP requests a look-up 
secret to provide resistance to 
eavesdropping and MitM:
must use an AACA and an authenticated protected channel.
3.5  Single-factor one-time password devices
For single-factor one-time password devices, the standards in the following table 
apply.
Standards for single-factor one-time password devices
Item Requirement the standard is:
1 For the secret cryptographic 
key and its algorithm:
must provide the minimum-security strength specified in 
the ISM’s Guidelines for Cryptography relevant to the 
AACA in use.
2 For the nonce: must be of sufficient length to ensure that it is unique for 
each operation of the device over its lifetime.
Note: The specific secret may be, for example, the next 
numbered secret.
3 If the nonce used to generate 
the authentication output is 
based on a real time clock:
the nonce must be changed at least once every 2 minutes.
4 The OTP value associated 
with a given nonce:
must not be accepted more than once.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Data standards for ISPs  Chapter 2
Authenticating to a digital ID  Part 2
Standards for kinds of authenticators  Division 3
Section 3.6
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 19
Standards for single-factor one-time password devices
Item Requirement the standard is:
5 If a single-factor OTP 
authenticator is being 
associated with a digital ID:
must use an AACA to either generate and exchange, or to 
obtain, the secrets required to duplicate the authentication 
output.
6 If collecting the OTP to 
provide resistance to 
eavesdropping and MitM:
must use AACAs and an authenticated protected channel.
7 If providing replay resistance, 
the entity’s information 
technology system:
must not accept a given time-based OTP more than once 
during the validity period of the authenticator involved.
8 Time-based OTPs: must have a defined lifetime that is determined by the 
expected clock drift, in either direction, of the authenticator 
over its lifetime, plus allowance for network delay and 
individual entry of the OTP.
3.6  Multi-factor one-time password devices
For multi-factor one-time password devices, the standards in the following table 
apply.
Note: When using biometric information as a factor for multi-factor one-time password 
devices, section 3.13 applies.
Standards for multi-factor one-time password devices
Item Requirements: the standard is:
1 The secret cryptographic key 
and its algorithm: 
must provide at least the minimum-security strength 
specified in the ISM’s Guidelines for Cryptography relevant 
to the AACA in use.
2 The nonce: must be of sufficient length to ensure that it is unique for 
each operation of the device over its lifetime.
3 The OTP authentication: must:
(a) not facilitate the cloning of the secret cryptographic key 
on to multiple devices; and
(b) establish that the MF OTP authenticator is a MF OTP 
device.
4 If the nonce used to generate 
the authentication output is 
based on a real-time clock:
the nonce must be changed at least once every 2 minutes.
5 If a memorised secret is used 
for activation:
must be a randomly chosen numeric secret at least 
6 decimal digits in length.
6 The unencrypted key and 
activation secret:
must be zeroised immediately after an OTP has been 
generated.
7 If the ISP collects biometric 
information using a custom 
biometric capability, the 
biometric sample, and any 
must be zeroised immediately after an OTP has been 
generated.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 2  Data standards for ISPs
Part 2  Authenticating to a digital ID
Division 3  Standards for kinds of authenticators
Section 3.7
20 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
Standards for multi-factor one-time password devices
Item Requirements: the standard is:
biometric information derived 
from the biometric sample:
8 If an MF OTP authenticator is 
being associated with a 
digital ID:
must use an AACA to either generate and exchange, or to 
obtain, the secrets required to duplicate the authentication 
output.
9 If collecting the OTP to 
provide resistance to 
eavesdropping and MitM:
must use an AACA and an authenticated protected channel 
when collecting the OTP.
10 Time-based OTPs: must have a defined lifetime that is determined by the 
expected clock drift - in either direction - of the 
authenticator over its lifetime, plus allowance for network 
delay and individual entry of the OTP.
11 Replay resistance: the accredited entity’s information technology system must 
not accept a given time-based OTP more than once during 
the validity period of the authenticator.
3.7  Single-factor cryptographic software
For single-factor cryptographic software, the standards in the following table 
apply.
Standards for single-factor cryptographic software
Item Requirement: the standard is:
1 The secret cryptographic key 
and its algorithm:
must:
(a) provide at least the minimum-security strength 
specified in the latest edition of the ISM;
(b) be stored in suitably secure storage available to the 
authenticator application. Applications must utilise one 
of the following mechanisms to be considered as secure 
storage:
(i) keychain storage;
(ii) Trusted Platform Module;
(iii) Trusted Execution Environment;
(iv) secure element; and
(c) only be accessible to the authenticating software on the 
device that is authorised. All unauthorised software 
must not be able to access the secret key. 
2 The single-factor 
cryptographic device:
must encapsulate one or more secret cryptographic keys, 
unique to the device, that cannot be removed from the 
device.
3 The secret cryptographic key 
and its algorithm:
must provide at least 112 bits of effective security strength.
4 The challenge nonce: must:
(a) be at least 64 bits in length; and
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Data standards for ISPs  Chapter 2
Authenticating to a digital ID  Part 2
Standards for kinds of authenticators  Division 3
Section 3.8
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 21
Standards for single-factor cryptographic software
Item Requirement: the standard is:
(b) either be unique over the authenticator’s lifetime, or be 
statistically unique.
5 Approved cryptography: must be used for authentication events.
6 Cryptographic keys: must be protected against modification and unauthorised 
disclosure.
3.8  Multi-factor cryptographic software
For multi-factor cryptographic software, the standards in the following table 
apply. 
Note: When using biometric information as a factor for multi-factor cryptographic software, 
section 3.13 applies.
Standards for multi-factor cryptographic software
Item Requirement: the standard is:
1 The secret cryptographic key 
and its algorithm:
(a) must only be accessible by a device’s software 
components that require access; and
(b) the ISP must implement access controls to prevent 
unauthorised access to the secret cryptographic key.
2 Authentication events: must require the input of 2 or more authentication factors to 
execute that authentication event. 
3 Any memorised secret used 
for activation:
must be a randomly chosen numeric value at least 6 decimal 
digits in length.
4 The unencrypted key and 
activation secret:
must be zeroised immediately after an authentication has 
taken place.
5 If the ISP collects biometric 
information using a custom 
biometric capability, the 
biometric sample, and any 
biometric information derived 
from the biometric sample:
must be zeroised immediately after an authentication has 
taken place.
6 Cryptographic keys: must:
(a) be stored in suitably secure storage available to the 
authenticator application. Applications must utilise one 
of following mechanism to be considered as secure 
storage:
(i) keychain storage;
(ii) Trusted Platform Module;
(iii) Trusted Execution Environment;
(iv) secure element; and
(b) must be protected against modification; and 
unauthorised disclosure.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 2  Data standards for ISPs
Part 2  Authenticating to a digital ID
Division 3  Standards for kinds of authenticators
Section 3.9
22 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
Standards for multi-factor cryptographic software
Item Requirement: the standard is:
7 The challenge nonce: must:
(a) be at least 64 bits in length; and
(b) either be unique over the authenticator’s lifetime or be 
statistically unique.
8 The authentication event: must use approved cryptography.
3.9  Multi-factor cryptographic devices
For multi-factor cryptographic devices, the standards in the following table 
apply.
Note: When using biometric information as a factor for multi-factor cryptographic device, 
section 3.13 applies.
Standards for multi-factor cryptographic devices
Item Requirement: the standard is:
1 The secret cryptographic key 
and its algorithm:
must:
(a) provide at least the minimum-security strength 
specified in the ISM’s Guidelines for Cryptography 
relevant to the AACA in use; and 
(b) be accessible only through the presentation and 
verification of an activation factor, using either 
biometric information for authentication or an 
activation secret.
2 The challenge nonce: must:
(a) be at least 64 bits in length; and
(b) either be unique over the authenticator’s lifetime, or be 
statistically unique.
3 Approved cryptography: must be used for authentication events.
4 Cryptographic keys: must be protected against modification and unauthorised 
disclosure.
3.10  Single-factor cryptographic devices
For single-factor cryptographic devices, the standards in the following table 
apply.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Data standards for ISPs  Chapter 2
Authenticating to a digital ID  Part 2
Standards for kinds of authenticators  Division 3
Section 3.11
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 23
Standards for single-factor cryptographic devices
Item Requirement: the standard is:
1 The secret cryptographic key 
and its algorithm: 
must:
(a) provide at least the minimum-security strength 
specified in the ISM’s Guidelines for Cryptography 
relevant to the AACA in use; and
(b) be designed so as to prohibit the export of the 
authentication secret.
2 The challenge nonce: must:
(a) be at least 64 bits in length; and
(b) either be unique over the authenticator’s lifetime, or be 
statistically unique.
3 Approved cryptography: must be used for authentication events.
4 Cryptographic keys: must be protected against modification and unauthorised 
disclosure.
5 Cryptography device: must be a separate piece of hardware or an embedded 
processor or execution environment.
3.11  Out-of-band devices
For out-of-band devices, the standards in the following table apply.
Standards for out-of-band devices
Item Requirement: the standard is:
1 The out-of-band device: must establish a separate channel with the ISP’s 
information technology system to retrieve the out-of-band 
secret or authentication request.
Note: This separate channel is out-of-band with respect to 
the primary communication channel (even if it 
terminates on the same device), provided the device 
does not leak information from one channel to the 
other without the consent of the individual. 
2 The out-of-band device: must uniquely authenticate itself in one of the following 
ways when communicating with the entity’s information 
technology system:
(a) establish an authenticated protected channel to the 
entity’s information technology system that:
(i) uses approved cryptography; and
(ii) stores relevant cryptographic keys in suitably 
secure storage available to the authenticator 
application; or
(b) only where a secret is being sent from the entity’s 
information technology system to the out-of-band 
device via the PSTN, authenticate to a public mobile 
telephone network using a SIM card or equivalent that 
uniquely identifies the device.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 2  Data standards for ISPs
Part 2  Authenticating to a digital ID
Division 3  Standards for kinds of authenticators
Section 3.11
24 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
Standards for out-of-band devices
Item Requirement: the standard is:
3 If the out-of-band device 
sends an approval message 
over the secondary 
communication channel, 
rather than by the individual 
transferring a received secret 
to the primary communication 
channel, the device:
(a) must accept transfer of the secret from the primary 
channel, which secret must be sent to the entity’s 
information technology system over the secondary 
channel to associate the approval with the 
authentication transaction; or
(b) must:
(i) present a secret received via the secondary 
channel from the entity’s information technology 
system;
Example: The individual may perform the transfer 
manually or use a technology such as a 
barcode or QR code to affect the transfer.
(ii) prompt the individual to verify the consistency of 
that secret with the primary channel, before 
accepting a yes/no response from the individual; 
and
(iii) send that response to the entity’s information 
technology system.
4 If out-of-band verification is 
conducted using a secure 
application on a device and 
the entity’s information 
technology system sends a 
push notification to that 
device:
(a) the entity’s information technology system must wait 
for the establishment of an authenticated protected 
channel and must verify the device’s identifying 
cryptographic key; and
(b) the identifying cryptographic key received must not be 
stored.
5 The entity’s information 
technology system:
must:
(a) use a verification method to uniquely identify the 
device; and
(b) authenticate the device before transmitting the 
authentication secret to the device.
6 The entity’s information 
technology system;
must, depending on the type of out-of-band device:
(a) transfer the secret to the primary channel as follows:
(i) signal the device containing the individual’s 
authenticator to indicate readiness to authenticate;
(ii) after transmitting such signal, transmit a random 
authentication secret to the out-of-band device; 
and
(iii) wait for the random authentication secret to be 
returned on the primary communication channel; 
or
(b) transfer the secret to the secondary channel as follows:
(i) display a random authentication secret to the 
individual via the primary channel; and
(ii) wait for the random authentication secret to be 
returned on the secondary channel from the 
individual’s out-of-band device; or
(c) obtain verification of secrets from the individual as 
follows:
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Data standards for ISPs  Chapter 2
Authenticating to a digital ID  Part 2
Standards for kinds of authenticators  Division 3
Section 3.11
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 25
Standards for out-of-band devices
Item Requirement: the standard is:
(i) displays a random authentication secret to the 
individual via the primary channel; 
(ii) sends the same random authentication secret to 
the out-of-band device via the secondary channel 
for presentation to the individual; and
(iii) after transmitting the random authentication secret 
referred to in subparagraphs (c)(i) and (ii), wait 
for an approval (or disapproval) message via the 
secondary channel; and
(d) for each option in this item, the authentication must be 
considered invalid if each of the required activities are 
not completed within 10 minutes.
7 To provide replay resistance: the entity’s information technology system must not accept 
a given authentication secret more than once during the 
validity period.
8 Random authentication 
secrets:
must have with at least 20 bits of entropy.
9 If the random authentication 
secret has less than 64 bits of 
entropy:
the entity’s information technology system must 
incorporate a rate-limiting mechanism that limits the 
number of failed attempts to authenticate to a digital ID.
10 If out-of-band verification is 
to be made using the PSTN:
the ISP must: 
(a) verify that the pre-registered telephone number being 
used is associated with a specific physical device; and
(b) conduct the verification in accordance with the risk-
management strategies required to be detailed in the 
entity’s system security plan (see Subdivision 1 of 
Division 3 of Part 4.1 of Chapter 4 of the Accreditation 
Rules);
(c) inform individuals in clear and simple terms of the 
security risks of using out-of-band verification via the 
PSTN; and 
(d) offer individuals at least one alternative authenticator 
that can be used to authenticate to the required 
authentication level.
11 Out-of-band verification: must not use email or voice-over-IP (VOIP) telephone 
numbers.
12 If an individual requests to 
change their pre-registered 
telephone number: 
the individual must first authenticate to their digital ID 
using their existing authenticator.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 2  Data standards for ISPs
Part 2  Authenticating to a digital ID
Division 4  Standards for security requirements
Section 3.12
26 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
Division 4—Standards for security requirements
3.12  Standards for security requirements
When authenticating an individual to their digital ID, the standards in the 
following table apply.
Standards for security requirements
Item Requirements: the standard is:
1 Phishing resistance (when 
authenticating to AL3):
(a) an authenticator is not phishing resistant if it involves 
the manual entry of an authentication output, such as 
out-of-band and OTP authenticators;
(b) the phishing resistant authentication protocol must:
(i) establish an authenticated protected channel with 
the entity’s information technology system; and
(ii) strongly and irreversibly bind a channel identifier 
that was negotiated in establishing the 
authenticated protected channel to the 
authentication output;
Note: The binding may occur by signing the 2 values 
together using a private key (the cryptographic 
key in an asymmetric cryptographic key pair 
that must be kept secret) controlled by the 
individual for which the public key is known 
to the entity.
(c) the ISP’s information technology system must validate 
the signature or other information used to prove 
phishing resistance;
(d) an AACA must be used to establish phishing 
resistance; and
(e) cryptographic keys for the purpose of establishing 
phishing resistance must provide at least 112 bits of 
effective security strength.
2 AE-compromise resistance 
when authenticating to AL3:
(a) public keys stored by the ISP must be associated with 
the use of an AACA; and
(b) cryptographic keys must provide at least 112 bits of 
effective security strength.
3 Authentication intent: when authenticating to AL3, and AL2 if authentication 
intent is used for that level, the authentication intent must 
be established by the authenticator itself.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Data standards for ISPs  Chapter 2
Authenticating to a digital ID  Part 2
Standards for security requirements  Division 4
Section 3.12
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 27
Standards for security requirements
Item Requirements: the standard is:
4 Rate limiting (throttling): (a) rate limiting must be implemented and maintained for 
each of:
(i) memorised secrets;
(ii) look-up secrets;
(iii) single-factor OTPs; and
(iv) multi-factor OTPs;
(b) controls must be implemented and maintained within 
the entity’s information technology system to protect 
authenticators against online guessing attacks; and
(c) consecutive failed authentication attempts on the digital 
ID of an individual must be limited to no more than 
100.
5 Authenticator attestation 
where the authenticator 
attestation is signed:
the attestation must be signed using a digital signature that 
provides at least 112 bits of effective security strength.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 2  Data standards for ISPs
Part 2  Authenticating to a digital ID
Division 5  Authentication using biometric information
Section 3.13
28 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
Division 5—Authentication using biometric information
3.13  Standards for authentication using biometric information
When authenticating an individual to their digital ID using biometric information 
of the individual, the standards in the following table apply.
Standards for authentication using biometric information
Item Column 1 Column 2
Requirement: Requirement:
1 Use of biometric information 
for authentication:
must be conducted only using:
(a) in-device biometric capability (see item 3 in this table); 
or
(b) custom biometric capability (see item 4 in this table).
2 When biometric information 
can be used for 
authentication as a factor to 
unlock a multi-factor 
authenticator:
(a) only where the relevant authenticator is a:
(i) multi-factor one-time password device;
(ii) multi-factor cryptographic software; or
(iii) multi-factor cryptographic device; and
(b) only where the relevant authenticator:
(i) requires 2 or more factors to execute a single 
authentication event; and
(ii) is possession-based, where the device is 
authenticated as a part of the single authentication 
event.
3 In-device biometric 
capability: 
must:
(a) only be used as a factor for authentication events to 
meet AL1 or AL2; and 
(b) not allow the use of in-device biometric capability that 
operates on devices that cannot receive operating system 
security updates.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Data standards for ISPs  Chapter 2
Authenticating to a digital ID  Part 2
Authentication using biometric information  Division 5
Section 3.13
Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024 29
Standards for authentication using biometric information
Item Column 1 Column 2
Requirement: Requirement:
4 Custom biometric capability: (a) an authenticated protected channel between the sensor 
and the accredited entity’s information technology 
system must be set up before capturing the biometric 
information from the individual;
(b) must use a biometric matching algorithm to conduct 
one-to-one biometric matching between the acquired 
image and the biometric template;
(c) biometric matching must be conducted using the 
biometric matching algorithm:
(i) locally on the individual’s device; or
(ii) centrally, being where the biometric information is 
transferred to the entity’s information technology 
system and the biometric matching is conducted 
remotely by the entity from the individual’s device;
(d) if biometric matching is conducted centrally:
(i) use of the biometric as an authentication factor 
must be limited to one or more specific devices that 
are identified using approved cryptography;
(ii) a separate cryptographic key must be used for 
identifying the device, as distinct from the 
biometric factor;
(iii) all transmission of biometrics must occur over the 
authenticated protected channel; and
(iv) biometric template protection specified in ISO/IEC 
24745:2022 must be implemented;
(e) presentation attack detection must:
(i) be based on data captured by both the data capture 
subsystem and through system level monitoring, as 
described by ISO/IEC 30107-1:2023; and
(ii) include liveness detection;
(f) the capture of the acquired image and presentation 
attack detection processes must be completed as part of 
the same process before submission of the acquired 
biometric for biometric matching;
(g) the presentation attack detection determination (as to 
whether the biometric presentation passes as being 
genuine according to the PAD system) must be made 
either:
(i) locally on the individual’s device; or
(ii) centrally (where the biometric information is 
transferred to the ISP’s information technology 
system and the biometric matching is conducted 
remotely by the entity from the individual’s 
device);
(h) presentation attack detection must allow no more than 
5 consecutive failed authentication attempts;
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024
Chapter 2  Data standards for ISPs
Part 2  Authenticating to a digital ID
Division 5  Authentication using biometric information
Section 3.13
30 Digital ID (Accreditation) Data Standards 2024
Standards for authentication using biometric information
Item Column 1 Column 2
Requirement: Requirement:
(i) once the limit of consecutive failed attempts has been 
reached, the custom biometric capability must either:
(i) impose a delay of at least 30 seconds before the 
individual’s next attempt to authenticate using the 
custom biometric capability, increasing 
exponentially with each successive attempt (e.g., 
one minute before the following attempt, 2 minutes 
before the second following attempt); or
(ii) disable the custom biometric capability for 
authentication and offer another authentication 
factor that is a different biometric modality or a 
PIN/passcode if not already a required factor;
(j) subject to paragraph (k)—the presentation attack 
detection technology must be tested in accordance with 
section 2.3;
(k) despite item 3 in the table in section 2.3 all presentation 
attack instrument species used in testing of the 
biometric algorithm must have an APCER of no more 
than 10%; and
(l) the biometric matching algorithm must be tested in 
accordance with section 2.5.
Authorised Version F2024L01435 registered 12/11/2024