UK digital verification services trust framework (1.0) - GOV.UK
Cookies on GOV.UK
We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.
You have accepted additional cookies.
You can
change your cookie settings
at any time.
You have rejected additional cookies.
You can
change your cookie settings
at any time.
Accept additional cookies
Reject additional cookies
View cookies
Hide cookie message
Skip to main content
Guidance
UK digital verification services trust framework (1.0)
This is the 1.0 version of the UK digital verification services (DVS) trust framework, which sets rules for an organisation to follow if they want their service certified as a trustworthy DVS
From:
Office for Digital Identities and Attributes
,
Department for Science, Innovation and Technology
and
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
Published:
3 March 2026
Last updated:
9 June 2026
            —
See all updates
Get emails about this page
Documents
UK digital verification services trust framework (1.0)
HTML
Details
This is the 1.0 publication of the UK digital verification services trust framework. It is published under section 28 of the Data (Use and Access) Act 2025 (‘the Act’), and it is the first revised statutory trust framework publication under the Act.
This publication supersedes the March 2026 pre-release that was shared for business readiness purposes.
It will come into force on the date the first conformity assessment body (‘CAB’) is accredited to certify against it, which will be no earlier than 1 September 2026.
Further information on
how digital verification services can get certified
can be found on the
Office for Digital Identities and Attributes
website.
If you’re looking for other versions of the trust framework, you can also
view all current and previous versions of the trust framework
.
Updates to this page
Published 3 March 2026
Last updated 9 June 2026
—
Show all updates
9 June 2026
The publication has been updated to reflect that it is now in its final release, rather than in pre-release.
6 March 2026
Fixing and adding links, and rectifying formatting issues.
3 March 2026
First published.
Sign up for emails or print this page
Get emails about this page
Print this page
Related content
Is this page useful?
Maybe
Yes
this page is useful
No
this page is not useful
Thank you for your feedback
Report a problem with this page
Help us improve GOV.UK
Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.
This field is for robots only. Please leave blank
What were you doing?
What went wrong?
Send
Cancel
Help us improve GOV.UK
To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab
and requires JavaScript
)
.
Cancel