UK digital verification services trust framework data schema (1.0) - GOV.UK
Cookies on GOV.UK
We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.
You have accepted additional cookies.
You can
change your cookie settings
at any time.
You have rejected additional cookies.
You can
change your cookie settings
at any time.
Accept additional cookies
Reject additional cookies
View cookies
Hide cookie message
Skip to main content
Guidance
UK digital verification services trust framework data schema (1.0)
A specification to help DVS and relying parties organise and exchange information in a consistent way to enable interoperability
From:
Office for Digital Identities and Attributes
,
Department for Science, Innovation and Technology
and
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
Published:
3 March 2026
Last updated:
13 April 2026
            —
See all updates
Get emails about this page
Documents
Data taxonomy, data model and data dictionary for GPG 45
HTML
Data taxonomy, data model and data dictionary for GPG 44
HTML
Details
This data schema helps
DVS
and relying parties organise and exchange information in a consistent way to enable interoperability.
This is the 1.0 version of the data schema. It has been published to coincide with the publication of the pre-release of
the 1.0 UK
DVS
trust framework
alongside pre-releases of the other
trust framework supporting documents
.
The data schema describes a data taxonomy, data model and data dictionary for two other supporting documents:
How to check someone’s identity
, also known as Good Practice Guide (GPG) 45; and
How to use authenticators to protect an online service
, also known as Good Practice Guide (GPG) 44.
As use of the data schema is optional for services certified against current versions of the trust framework, and will be optional once certifications begin against the 1.0 version, you can start to make use of this data schema whenever and however you would like, though it has been designed to map onto the 1.0 publications of
GPG 45
and
GPG 44
.
We may publish new explanations or alternative presentations of the data schema documents over time and before a new version of the trust framework is published. We will publish these, or point out to them, on this page.
Updates to this page
Published 3 March 2026
Last updated 13 April 2026
—
Show all updates
13 April 2026
corrected a typo where an instance of 'content_format' incorrectly read as 'content_type'.
6 March 2026
Fixing and adding links, and rectifying formatting issues.
3 March 2026
First published.
Sign up for emails or print this page
Get emails about this page
Print this page
Related content
Is this page useful?
Maybe
Yes
this page is useful
No
this page is not useful
Thank you for your feedback
Report a problem with this page
Help us improve GOV.UK
Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.
This field is for robots only. Please leave blank
What were you doing?
What went wrong?
Send
Cancel
Help us improve GOV.UK
To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab
and requires JavaScript
)
.
Cancel