GOV.UK Wallet - GOV.UK
Cookies on GOV.UK
We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.
You have accepted additional cookies.
You can
change your cookie settings
at any time.
You have rejected additional cookies.
You can
change your cookie settings
at any time.
Accept additional cookies
Reject additional cookies
View cookies
Hide cookie message
Skip to main content
GOV.UK Wallet
How GOV.UK Wallet will work
GOV.UK Wallet will let you save government documents to your phone using an app. It is not ready to use yet, but some people will be able to start using it soon.
You will be able to use GOV.UK Wallet to:
securely save government issued digital documents
show these documents to organisations, businesses and other parts of government to prove things such as your age, identity, or eligibility for services
You will be able to use the digital versions of documents in the same way as paper or card versions.
It will not be possible to add non-government documents, like train or concert tickets, to GOV.UK Wallet.
Use of GOV.UK Wallet will be entirely optional.
When GOV.UK Wallet will be available
You cannot download or use GOV.UK Wallet yet.
If you have an HM Armed Forces Veteran Card, you can now
save a digital version on your phone
with the GOV.UK One Login app.
In future you’ll be able to save more government documents, including your driving licence, to the app.
You’ll need a
GOV.UK One Login
to save government documents to your phone. This means that nobody else can use your documents, or access them without your permission.
Is this page useful?
Maybe
Yes
this page is useful
No
this page is not useful
Thank you for your feedback
Report a problem with this page
Help us improve GOV.UK
Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.
This field is for robots only. Please leave blank
What were you doing?
What went wrong?
Send
Cancel
Help us improve GOV.UK
To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab
and requires JavaScript
)
.
Cancel