Using GOV.UK Wallet in the digital identity sector - GOV.UK
Cookies on GOV.UK
We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.
You have accepted additional cookies.
You can
change your cookie settings
at any time.
You have rejected additional cookies.
You can
change your cookie settings
at any time.
Accept additional cookies
Reject additional cookies
View cookies
Hide cookie message
Skip to main content
Guidance
Using GOV.UK Wallet in the digital identity sector
Organisations certified against the trust framework will be able to use the information in GOV.UK Wallet.
From:
Government Digital Service
and
Office for Digital Identities and Attributes
Published:
14 May 2025
Last updated:
1 September 2026
            —
See all updates
Get emails about this page
Print this page
GOV.UK Wallet lets users prove things about themselves using government-issued documents safely stored on their phone. It’s secured by GOV.UK One Login and a proven identity.
Users can choose to share documents with a digital verification service, which will be able to access, verify, and use the information on offer.
The powers to access and use the information are laid out in the
Data (Use and Access) Bill
. Digital verification services will first need to be certified against the
UK digital identity and attributes trust framework
, and added to the
digital identity and attribute services register
.
How digital verification services can use GOV.UK Wallet
Once on the register, digital verification services will be able to use GOV.UK Wallet in 2 ways. They could do any, or all, of the following:
Use the information in GOV.UK Wallet to offer a range of identity and attribute services.
Share information from GOV.UK Wallet with other businesses who need to prove information about an individual.
Find out more about how this will work in our
technical documentation
.
1. Using the information in GOV.UK Wallet
If certified as an identity or attribute service provider, services can use the information in GOV.UK Wallet to help someone prove something about themselves digitally. This is similar to how this is done now using physical documents.
If they are also certified as a holder service, they could use information from GOV.UK Wallet to create a new reusable digital identity document. This is also known as a ‘derived credential’. It could either prove specific things like age, or contain a range of different identity or other eligibility information.
2. Sharing GOV.UK Wallet information with other businesses
Businesses certified as orchestration service providers could in future share information from GOV.UK Wallet with another business to prove something about a user. An example would be a retailer using GOV.UK Wallet to verify a customer’s eligibility to buy age-restricted products, such as alcohol or energy drinks.
There’ll be no record of where the documents in GOV.UK Wallet have been used, or for what purpose.
What’s in GOV.UK Wallet
GOV.UK Wallet currently holds the HM Armed Forces Veteran Card. This will be followed by the digital driving licence.
Only government issued documents can be saved in GOV.UK Wallet. Users will not be able to save other types of documents, for example train or concert tickets.
What’s next
You can:
contact our engagement team at
govukwallet-queries@digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk
if you’d like to know more about how you could use GOV.UK Wallet
request access to our sandbox
look at our
technical documentation
, and give us feedback
find out more about how to be certified against the
trust framework
Updates to this page
Published 14 May 2025
Last updated 1 September 2026
—
Show all updates
1 September 2026
Updated to include mention of the sandbox
17 October 2025
Updated to say the HM Armed Forces Veteran Card is now available
14 May 2025
First published.
Sign up for emails or print this page
Get emails about this page
Print this page
Contents
Is this page useful?
Maybe
Yes
this page is useful
No
this page is not useful
Thank you for your feedback
Report a problem with this page
Help us improve GOV.UK
Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.
This field is for robots only. Please leave blank
What were you doing?
What went wrong?
Send
Cancel
Help us improve GOV.UK
To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab
and requires JavaScript
)
.
Cancel