NIST Special Publication
NIST SP 800-63-4
Digital Identity Guidelines
David Temoshok
Diana Proud-Madruga
Yee-Yin Choong
Ryan Galluzzo
Sarbari Gupta
Connie LaSalle
Naomi Lefkovitz
Andrew Regenscheid
This publication is available free of charge from:
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-63-4

NIST Special Publication
NIST SP 800-63-4
Digital Identity Guidelines
David Temoshok
Ryan Galluzzo
Connie LaSalle
Naomi Lefkovitz *
* Former NIST employee; all work for this publication was done while at NIST.
Applied Cybersecurity Division
Information Technology Laboratory
Andrew Regenscheid
Computer Security Division
Information Technology Laboratory
Yee-Yin Choong
Information Access Division
Information Technology Laboratory
Diana Proud-Madruga
Sarbari Gupta
Electrosoft
This publication is available free of charge from:
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-63-4
July 2025
U.S. Department of Commerce
Howard Lutnick, Secretary
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Craig Burkhardt, Acting Under Secretary for Standards and Technology and Acting NIST Director

Certain equipment, instruments, software, or materials, commercial or non-commercial, 
are identified in this paper in order to specify the experimental procedure adequately. 
Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement of any product 
or service by NIST, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are 
necessarily the best available for the purpose.
There may be references in this publication to other publications currently under 
development by NIST in accordance with its assigned statutory responsibilities. The 
information in this publication, including concepts and methodologies, may be used by 
federal agencies even before the completion of such companion publications. Thus, until 
each publication is completed, current requirements, guidelines, and procedures, where 
they exist, remain operative. For planning and transition purposes, federal agencies may 
wish to closely follow the development of these new publications by NIST.
Organizations are encouraged to review all draft publications during public comment 
periods and provide feedback to NIST. Many NIST cybersecurity publications, other than 
the ones noted above, are available at https://csrc.nist.gov/publications.
Authority
This publication has been developed by NIST in accordance with its statutory 
responsibilities under the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) 
of 2014, 44 U.S.C. § 3551 et seq., Public Law (P.L.) 113-283. NIST is responsible 
for developing information security standards and guidelines, including minimum 
requirements for federal information systems, but such standards and guidelines shall 
not apply to national security systems without the express approval of appropriate 
federal officials exercising policy authority over such systems. This guideline is consistent 
with the requirements of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130.
Nothing in this publication should be taken to contradict the standards and guidelines 
made mandatory and binding on federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce 
under statutory authority. Nor should these guidelines be interpreted as altering or 
superseding the existing authorities of the Secretary of Commerce, Director of the 
OMB, or any other federal official. This publication may be used by nongovernmental 
organizations on a voluntary basis and is not subject to copyright in the United States. 
Attribution would, however, be appreciated by NIST.
NIST Technical Series Policies
Copyright, Fair Use, and Licensing Statements
NIST Technical Series Publication Identifier Syntax

Publication History
Approved by the NIST Editorial Review Board on 2025-04-28.
Supersedes NIST SP 800-63-3 (June 2017; updated March 2, 2020) https://doi.org/10.
6028/NIST.SP.800-63-3
How to Cite this NIST Technical Series Publication
Temoshok D, Galluzzo R, LaSalle C, Lefkovitz N, Regenscheid A, Choong YY, Proud-
Madruga D, Gupta S (2025) Digital Identity Guidelines. (National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-63-4. 
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-63-4
Author ORCID iDs
David Temoshok: 0000-0001-6195-0331
Diana Proud-Madruga: 0000-0002-8972-7809
Yee-Yin Choong: 0000-0002-3889-6047
Ryan Galluzzo: 0000-0003-0304-4239
Sarbari Gupta: 0000-0003-1101-0856
Connie LaSalle: 0000-0001-6031-7550
Naomi Lefkovitz: 0000-0003-3777-3106
Andrew Regenscheid: 0000-0002-3930-527X
Contact Information
mailto:dig-comments@nist.gov
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Attn: Applied Cybersecurity Division, Information Technology Laboratory
100 Bureau Drive (Mail Stop 2000) Gaithersburg, MD 20899-2000
Additional Information
Additional information about this publication is available at https://csrc.nist.gov/pubs/
sp/800/63/4/final, including related content, potential updates, and document history.
All comments are subject to release under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Abstract
These guidelines cover the identity proofing, authentication, and federation of users 
(e.g., employees, contractors, or private individuals) who interact with government 
information systems over networks. They define technical requirements in each of 
the areas of identity proofing, enrollment, authenticators, management processes, 
authentication protocols, federation, and related assertions. They also offer technical 
recommendations and other informative text as helpful suggestions. The guidelines are 
not intended to constrain the development or use of standards outside of this purpose. 
This publication supersedes NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-63-3.
Keywords
assertions; authentication; authentication assurance; authenticator; credential service 
provider; digital authentication; identity proofing; federation; passwords; PKI.
Reports on Computer Systems Technology
The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical 
leadership for the Nation’s measurement and standards infrastructure. ITL develops 
tests, test methods, reference data, proof of concept implementations, and technical 
analyses to advance the development and productive use of information technology. 
ITL’s responsibilities include the development of management, administrative, technical, 
and physical standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of other 
than national security-related information in federal information systems. The Special 
Publication 800-series reports on ITL’s research, guidelines, and outreach efforts in 
information system security, and its collaborative activities with industry, government, 
and academic organizations.
i

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Patent Disclosure Notice
NOTICE: ITL has requested that holders of patent claims whose use may be required for 
compliance with the guidance or requirements of this publication disclose such patent 
claims to ITL. However, holders of patents are not obligated to respond to ITL calls for 
patents and ITL has not undertaken a patent search in order to identify which, if any, 
patents may apply to this publication.
As of the date of publication and following call(s) for the identification of patent claims 
whose use may be required for compliance with the guidance or requirements of this 
publication, no such patent claims have been identified to ITL.
No representation is made or implied by ITL that licenses are not required to avoid 
patent infringement in the use of this publication.
ii

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Table of Contents
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.
Scope and Applicability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.
How to Use This Suite of SPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3.
Enterprise Risk Management Requirements and Considerations . . . . .
4
1.3.1.
Security, Fraud, and Threat Prevention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.2.
Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.3.
Customer Experience
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4.
Notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5.
Document Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2. Digital Identity Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.
Identity Proofing and Enrollment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1.
Subscriber Accounts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.
Authentication and Authenticator Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1.
Authenticators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2.
Authentication Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.
Federation and Assertions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5.
Examples of Digital Identity Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.1.
Non-Federated Digital Identity Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.2.
Federated Digital Identity Model With General-Purpose IdP . . .
17
2.5.3.
Federated Digital Identity Model with Subscriber-Controlled Wallet
18
3. Digital Identity Risk Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.
Define the Online Service
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.
Conduct Initial Impact Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.1.
Identify Impact Categories and Potential Harms
. . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.2.
Identify Potential Impact Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.3.
Impact Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.4.
Determine the Combined Impact Level for Each User Group . . .
32
3.3.
Select Initial Assurance Levels and Baseline Controls . . . . . . . . . . .
33
iii

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
3.3.1.
Assurance Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.2.
Assurance Level Descriptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.3.
Initial Assurance Level Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3.4.
Identify Baseline Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4.
Tailor and Document Assurance Levels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4.1.
Assess Privacy, Customer Experience, and Threat Resistance . . .
42
3.4.2.
Identify Compensating Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.4.3.
Identify Supplemental Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.4.4.
Digital Identity Acceptance Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.5.
Continuously Evaluate and Improve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.5.1.
Evaluation Inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.5.2.
Performance Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.5.3.
Measurement in Support of Customer Experience Outcomes
. .
50
3.6.
Redress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.7.
Cybersecurity, Fraud, and Identity Program Integrity . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.8.
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Identity Systems . . . . .
52
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Appendix A. List of Symbols, Abbreviations, and Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Appendix B. Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
Appendix C. Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
C.1.
SP 800-63-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
C.2.
SP 800-63-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
C.3.
SP 800-63-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
C.4.
SP 800-63-4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
List of Tables
Table 1.
IAL Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Table 2.
AAL Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
Table 3.
FAL Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Table 4.
Performance Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
iv

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
List of Figures
Fig. 1.
Sample Identity Proofing and Enrollment Digital Identity Model . . . . .
11
Fig. 2.
Sample Authentication Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Fig. 3.
Non-Federated Digital Identity Model Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
Fig. 4.
Federated Digital Identity Model Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Fig. 5.
Federated Digital Identity Model with Subscriber-Controlled Wallet Exam-
ple
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Fig. 6.
High-level diagram of the Digital Identity Risk Management Process Flow
25
v

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Preface
This publication and its companion volumes — [SP800-63A], [SP800-63B], and 
[SP800-63C] — provide technical and process guidelines to organizations for the 
implementation of digital identity services.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank their fellow collaborators — Christine Abruzzi, James 
L. Fenton, Justin P. Richer, and Maria Vachino — on the current revision of this special 
publication, as well as Kerrianne Buchanan and Evelyn Petrella for their contributions 
and review. The authors would also like to acknowledge the past contributions of Donna 
F. Dodson, Elaine M. Newton, Ray A. Perlner, W. Timothy Polk, Emad A. Nabbus, Paul A. 
Grassi, Michael E. Garcia, Kaitlin Boeckl, Joni Brennan, Ellen Nadeau, Ben Piccarreta, and 
Danna Gabel O’Rourke.
vi

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
1.
Introduction
This section is informative.
The rapid proliferation of online services over the past few years has heightened the 
need for reliable, secure, and privacy-protective digital identity solutions. A digital 
identity is always unique in the context of an online service. However, a person could 
have multiple digital identities and, while a digital identity could relay a unique and 
specific meaning within the context of an online service, the real-life identity of the 
individual behind the digital identity might not be known. When confidence in a person’s 
real-life identity is not required to provide access to an online service, organizations can 
use anonymous or pseudonymous accounts. In all other use cases, a digital identity is 
intended to establish trust between the holder of the digital identity and the person, 
organization, or system interacting with the online service. However, this process can 
present challenges. There are multiple opportunities for mistakes, miscommunication, 
and attacks that fraudulently claim another person’s identity. Additionally, given the 
broad range of individual needs, constraints, capacities, and preferences, online services 
must be designed with flexibility and customer experience in mind to support broad and 
enduring participation and access to online services.
Digital identity risks are dynamic and exist along a continuum. Consequently, a digital 
identity risk management approach should seek to manage risks using outcome-based 
approaches that are designed to meet the organization’s unique needs. These guidelines 
define specific assurance levels that operate as baseline control sets. These assurance 
levels provide multiple benefits, including a starting point for organizations in their 
risk management journey and a common structure for supporting interoperability 
between different entities. It is, however, impractical to create assurance levels that 
can comprehensively address the entire spectrum of risks, threats, or considerations 
that an organization will face when deploying an identity solution. For this reason, these 
guidelines promote a risk-based approach to digital identity solution implementation 
rather than a compliance-oriented approach, and organizations are encouraged to tailor 
their control implementations based on the processes defined in these guidelines.
Additionally, risks associated with digital identity stretch beyond the potential impacts 
to the organization providing online services. These guidelines endeavor to robustly 
and explicitly account for risks to individuals, communities, and other organizations. 
Organizations should also consider how digital identity decisions might affect, or need 
to accommodate, the individuals who interact with the organization’s programs and 
services. Privacy and customer experience for individuals should be considered along 
with security. Additionally, organizations should consider their digital identity approach 
alongside other mechanisms for identity management, such as those used in call centers 
and in-person interactions. By taking a customer-centric and continuously informed 
approach to mission delivery, organizations have an opportunity to incrementally build 
1

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
trust with the populations they serve, improve customer experience, identify issues 
more quickly, and provide individuals with appropriate and effective redress options.
The composition, models, and availability of identity services have significantly changed 
since the first version of SP 800-63 was released, as have the considerations and 
challenges of deploying secure, private, and usable services to users. This revision 
addresses these challenges by presenting guidance and requirements based on the roles 
and functions that entities perform as part of the overall digital identity model.
Additionally, this publication provides instruction for credential service providers (CSPs), 
verifiers, and relying parties (RPs), to supplement the NIST Risk Management Framework 
[NISTRMF] and its component publications. It describes the risk management processes 
that organizations should follow to implement digital identity services and expands 
upon the NIST RMF by outlining how customer experience considerations should be 
incorporated. It also highlights the importance of considering impacts on enterprise 
operations and assets, individuals, and other organizations. Furthermore, digital identity 
management processes for identity proofing, authentication, and federation typically 
involve processing personal information, which can present privacy risks. Therefore, 
these guidelines include privacy requirements and considerations to help mitigate 
potential associated risks.
Finally, while these guidelines provide organizations with technical requirements and 
recommendations for establishing, maintaining, and authenticating the digital identity of 
subjects who access digital systems over a network, they also recommend integration 
with systems and processes that are often outside of the control of identity and IT 
teams. As such, these guidelines provide considerations to improve coordination with 
organizations and deliver more effective, modern, and customer-driven online services.
1.1. Scope and Applicability
These guidelines apply to all online services for which some level of assurance in a digital 
identity is required, regardless of the constituency (e.g., the public, business partners, 
and government employees and contractors). For this publication, “person” refers only 
to natural persons.
These guidelines primarily focus on organizational services that interact with external 
users, such as individuals accessing public benefits or private-sector partners accessing 
collaboration spaces. However, they also apply to federal systems accessed by 
employees and contractors. The Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees 
and Contractors standard [FIPS201], and its corresponding set of Special Publications 
and organization-specific instructions, extend these guidelines for the federal enterprise 
by providing additional technical controls and processes for issuing and managing 
Personal Identity Verification (PIV) Cards, binding additional authenticators as derived 
PIV credentials, and using federation architectures and protocols with PIV systems.
2

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Online services not covered by these guidelines include those associated with national 
security systems as defined in [44 U.S.C. § 3552(b)(6)]. Private-sector organizations and 
state, local, and tribal governments whose digital processes require varying levels of 
digital identity assurance may consider the use of these standards where appropriate.
These guidelines address logical access to online systems, services, and applications. 
They do not specifically address physical access control processes. However, the 
processes specified in these guidelines can be applied to physical access use cases where 
appropriate. Additionally, these guidelines do not explicitly address some subjects 
including, but not limited to, machine-to-machine authentication, interconnected 
devices (e.g., Internet of Things [IoT] devices), or access to Application Programming 
Interfaces (APIs) on behalf of subjects.
1.2.
How to Use This Suite of SPs
These guidelines support the mitigation of the negative impacts of errors that occur 
during the functions of identity proofing, authentication, and federation. Section 3, 
Digital Identity Risk Management, describes the risk assessment process and how the 
results of the risk assessment and additional context inform the selection of controls 
to secure the identity proofing, authentication, and federation processes. Controls are 
selected by determining the assurance level required to mitigate each applicable type of 
digital identity error for a particular service based on risk and mission.
Specifically, organizations are required to select an assurance level1
1When described generically or bundled, these guidelines will refer to IAL, AAL, and FAL as xAL. Each xAL 
has three assurance levels.
 for each of the 
following functions:
• Identity Assurance Level (IAL) refers to identity proofing functions.
• Authentication Assurance Level (AAL) refers to authentication functions.
• Federation Assurance Level (FAL) refers to federation functions when the relying
party (RP) is connected to a credential service provider (CSP) or an identity
provider (IdP) through a federated protocol.
SP 800-63 is organized as the following suite of volumes:
• SP 800-63 Digital Identity Guidelines describes the digital identity models, risk
assessment methodology, and processes for selecting assurance levels for identity
proofing, authentication, and federation. SP 800-63 contains both normative and
informative material.
• [SP800-63A]: provides requirements for identity proofing and the remote or in-
person enrollment of applicants, who wish to gain access to resources at each of
the three IALs. It details the responsibilities of CSPs with respect to establishing
3

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
and maintaining subscriber accounts and binding CSP-issued or subscriber-
provided authenticators to the subscriber account. SP 800-63A contains both 
normative and informative material.
• [SP800-63B] provides requirements for authentication processes that can be 
used at each of the three AALs, including choices of authenticators. It also 
provides recommendations on events that can occur during the lifetime of 
authenticators (e.g., invalidation in the event of loss or theft). SP 800-63B contains 
both normative and informative material.
• [SP800-63C] provides requirements on the use of federated identity architectures 
and assertions to convey the results of authentication processes and relevant 
identity information to an organization’s application. SP 800-63C contains both 
normative and informative material.
1.3.
Enterprise Risk Management Requirements and Considerations
Effective enterprise risk management is multidisciplinary by design and involves 
the consideration of varied sets of factors and expectations. In a digital identity risk 
management context, these factors include, but are not limited to, information security, 
fraud, privacy, and customer experience. It is important for risk management efforts to 
weigh these factors as they relate to enterprise assets and operations, individuals, and 
other organizations.
During the process of analyzing factors that are relevant to digital identity, organizations 
might determine that measures outside of those specified in this publication are 
appropriate in certain contexts (e.g., where privacy or other legal requirements 
exist or where the output of a risk assessment leads the organization to determine 
that additional measures or alternative procedural safeguards are appropriate). 
Organizations, including federal agencies, can employ compensating or supplemental 
controls that are not specified in this publication. They can also consider partitioning 
the functionality of an online service to allow less sensitive functions to be available at a 
lower level of assurance to improve access without compromising security.
The considerations detailed below support enterprise risk management efforts 
and encourage informed and customer-centered service delivery. While this list of 
considerations is not exhaustive, it highlights a set of cross-cutting factors that are likely 
to impact decision-making associated with digital identity management.
1.3.1.
Security, Fraud, and Threat Prevention
It is increasingly important for organizations to assess and manage digital identity 
security risks, such as unauthorized access due to impersonation. As organizations 
consult these guidelines, they should consider potential impacts to the confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability of information and information systems that they manage, and 
4

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
that their service providers and business partners manage, on behalf of the individuals 
and communities that they serve.
Federal agencies implementing these guidelines are required to meet statutory 
responsibilities, including those under the Federal Information Security Modernization 
Act (FISMA) of 2014 [FISMA] and related NIST standards and guidelines. NIST 
recommends that non-federal organizations implementing these guidelines follow 
comparable standards (e.g., ISO/IEC 27001) to ensure the secure operation of their 
digital systems.
FISMA requires federal agencies to implement appropriate controls to protect federal 
information and information systems from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, 
disruption, or modification. The NIST RMF [NISTRMF] provides a process that integrates 
security, privacy, and cyber supply chain risk management activities into the system 
development life cycle. It is expected that federal agencies and organizations that 
provide services under these guidelines have already implemented the controls and 
processes required under FISMA and associated NIST risk management processes and 
publications.
The controls and requirements encompassed by the identity, authentication, and 
federation assurance levels under these guidelines augment but do not replace or alter 
the information and information system controls determined under FISMA and the RMF.
As threats evolve, it is important for organizations to assess and manage identity-
related fraud risks associated with identity proofing and authentication processes. 
As organizations consult these guidelines, they should consider the evolving threat 
environment, the availability of innovative anti-fraud measures in the digital identity 
market, and the potential impacts of identity-related fraud on their systems and 
users. This is particularly important for public-facing online services where the impact 
of identity-related fraud on digital government service delivery, public trust, and 
organization reputation can be substantial.
This version enhances measures to combat identity theft and identity-related fraud 
by repurposing IAL1 as a new assurance level, updating authentication risk and threat 
models to account for new attacks, providing new options for phishing-resistant 
authentication, introducing requirements to prevent automated attacks against 
enrollment processes, and preparing for new technologies (e.g., mobile driver’s licenses 
and verifiable credentials) that can leverage strong identity proofing and authentication.
1.3.2.
Privacy
When designing, implementing, and managing digital identity systems, it is imperative 
to consider the potential of that system to create privacy-related problems for 
individuals when processing (e.g., collection, storage, use, and destruction) personal 
information and the potential impacts of problematic data actions. If a breach of 
5

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
personal information or a release of sensitive information occurs, organizations need 
to ensure that the privacy notices describe, in plain language, what information was 
improperly released and, if known, how the information was exploited.
Organizations need to demonstrate how organizational privacy policies and system 
privacy requirements have been implemented in their systems. These guidelines 
recommend that organizations take steps to implement digital identity risk management 
with privacy in mind, which can be supported by referencing:
• [NISTPF] NIST Privacy Framework, which enables privacy engineering practices that 
support privacy by design concepts and helps organizations protect individuals’ 
privacy
• [PrivacyAct] of 1974, which established fair information practices for the 
collection, maintenance, use, and disclosure of information about individuals that 
is maintained by federal agencies in systems of records
• [M-03-22] OMB Guidance for Implementing the Privacy Provisions of the E-
Government Act of 2002, which requires the performance and public notification 
of privacy impact assessments (PIAs) that are required for processing or storing 
personal information
• [SP800-53] Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and 
Organizations, which lists privacy controls that can be implemented to mitigate 
the risks identified in the privacy risk and impact assessments
• [SP800-122] Guide to Protecting the Confidentiality of Personally Identifiable 
Information (PII), which assists federal agencies in understanding what personal 
information is; the relationship between protecting the confidentiality of personal 
information; privacy and the Fair Information Practices; and safeguards for 
protecting personal information
Furthermore, each volume of SP 800-63 contains a specific section that provides detailed 
privacy guidance and considerations for implementing the processes, controls, and 
requirements presented in that volume as well as normative requirements on data 
collection, retention, and minimization.
1.3.3.
Customer Experience
It is essential that these guidelines provide organizations with the ability to create 
modern, streamlined, and responsive customer experiences. To do this, the guidelines 
allow organizations to factor in the capabilities and expectations of users when making 
decisions and trade-offs in the risk management process. Organizations that implement 
these guidelines must understand their user populations, capabilities, and limitations as 
part of setting an effective digital identity risk management strategy.
6

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
There have been several major additions to these guidelines to ensure responsive and 
effective customer experiences. In addition to adding new technologies to each of the 
volumes, as applicable, this volume introduces two key concepts:
1. Control tailoring. Control tailoring allows organizations to make informed risk-
based decisions to deploy technologies and processes that work for their users and 
adjust their baseline controls through informed decision-making to meet customer 
experience needs.
2. Continuous improvement programs. Establishing a continuous evaluation 
program provides organizations with the ability to evaluate how well they are 
mitigating risks and meeting the needs of their users. Through metrics and cross-
functional assessment programs, this guideline sets a foundation for a data-driven 
approach to providing effective, modern solutions that support organizations’ 
extensive user populations.
These two concepts are discussed in detail in Sec. 3 of this document.
As a part of improving customer experience, these guidelines also emphasize the need to 
provide options for users to “meet the customer where they are.” When coupled with a 
continuous improvement strategy and customer-centered design, this can help identify 
the opportunities, processes, business partners, and multi-channel identity proofing 
and service delivery methods that best support the needs of the populations that an 
organization serves.
Additionally, usability refers to the extent to which a system, product, or service can be 
used to achieve goals with effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction in a specified context 
of use. Usability supports the major objectives of customer experience, service delivery, 
and security, and requires an understanding of the people who interact with a digital 
identity system or process, as well as their unique capabilities and context of use.
Readers of this guideline should take a holistic approach to considering the interactions 
that each user will engage in throughout the process of enrolling in and authenticating 
to a service. Throughout the design and development of a digital identity system or 
process, it is important to conduct usability evaluations with representative users 
and perform realistic scenarios and tasks in appropriate contexts of use. Additionally, 
following usability guidelines and considerations can help organizations meet their 
customer experience goals. Digital identity management processes should be designed 
and implemented so that it is easy for users to do the right thing, hard to do the wrong 
thing, and easy to recover when the wrong thing happens.
7

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
1.4.
Notations
This guideline uses the following typographical conventions in text:
• Specific terms in CAPITALS  represent normative requirements. When these same 
terms are not in CAPITALS , the term does not represent a normative requirement.
– The terms “ SHALL ” and “ SHALL NOT ” indicate requirements to be followed 
strictly in order to conform to the publication and from which no deviation is 
permitted.
– The terms “ SHOULD ” and “ SHOULD NOT ” indicate that among several 
possibilities, one is recommended as particularly suitable without mentioning 
or excluding others, that a certain course of action is preferred but not 
necessarily required, or that (in the negative form) a certain possibility or 
course of action is discouraged but not prohibited.
– The terms “ MAY ” and “ NEED NOT ” indicate a course of action permissible 
within the limits of the publication.
– The terms “ CAN ” and “ CANNOT ” indicate a possibility and capability — 
whether material, physical, or causal — or, in the negative, the absence of 
that possibility or capability.
1.5.
Document Structure
This document is organized as follows. Each section is labeled as either normative (i.e., 
mandatory for compliance) or informative (i.e., not mandatory).
• Section 1 introduces the document. This section is informative.
• Section 2 describes a general model for digital identity. This section is informative.
• Section 3 describes the digital identity risk model. This section is normative.
• The References section contains a list of publications that are cited in this 
document. This section is informative.
• Appendix A contains a selected list of abbreviations used in this document. This 
appendix is informative.
• Appendix B contains a glossary of selected terms used in this document. This 
appendix is informative.
• Appendix C contains a summarized list of changes in this document’s history. This 
appendix is informative.
8

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
2.
Digital Identity Model
This section is informative.
2.1.
Overview
These guidelines use digital identity models that reflect technologies and architectures 
that are currently available in the market. These models have a variety of entities 
and functions and vary in complexity. Simple models group functions (e.g., creating 
subscriber accounts, providing attributes) under a single entity. More complex models 
separate these functions among multiple entities.
The roles and functions found in these digital identity models include:
Subject: In these guidelines, a subject is a person and is represented by one of three 
roles, depending on where they are in the digital identity process.
• Applicant — A subject to be identity-proofed and enrolled.
• Subscriber — A subject who has successfully completed the identity proofing 
and enrollment process or who has been successfully authenticated to an online 
service.
• Claimant — A subject “making a claim” to be eligible for authentication.
Service provider: Service providers can perform any combination of functions involved 
in granting access to and delivering online services, such as a credential service provider, 
relying party, verifier, and identity provider.
Credential service provider (CSP): CSP functions include identity proofing applicants, 
enrolling them into their identity service, establishing subscriber accounts, and binding 
authenticators to those accounts. A subscriber account is the CSP’s established record of 
the subscriber, the subscriber’s attributes, and associated authenticators. CSP functions 
may be performed by an independent third party.
Relying party (RP): RPs provide online transactions and services and rely upon a verifier’s 
assertion of a subscriber’s identity to grant access to those services. When using 
federation, the RP accesses the information in the subscriber account through assertions 
from an identity provider (IdP).
Verifier: A verifier confirms the claimant’s identity by verifying the claimant’s possession 
and control of one or more authenticators using an authentication protocol. To do 
this, the verifier needs to confirm the binding of the authenticators with the subscriber 
account and check that the subscriber account is active.
Identity provider (IdP): When using federation, the IdP manages the subscriber’s 
primary authenticators and issues assertions derived from the subscriber account.
9

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
While presented as separate roles, the functions of the CSP, verifier, 
and IdP may be performed by a single entity or distributed across 
multiple entities, depending on the implementation (see Sec. 2.5).
2.2.
Identity Proofing and Enrollment
[SP800-63A], Digital Identity Guidelines: Identity Proofing and Enrollment, provides 
general guidance information and normative requirements for the identity proofing and 
enrollment processes as well as IAL-specific requirements.
[SP800-63A] provides general information and normative requirements for the identity 
proofing and enrollment processes as well as requirements that are specific to IALs.
Figure 1 illustrates a common transaction sequence for the identity proofing and 
enrollment functions.
Identity proofing and enrollment begin when an applicant initiates identity proofing, 
often by attempting to access an online application served by the CSP. The CSP or its 
component service requests identity evidence and attributes from the applicant, which 
the applicant submits via an online or in-person transaction. The CSP resolves the user 
(i.e., uniquely distinguishes the user), validates the accuracy and authenticity of the 
evidence, and validates the accuracy of the attributes. If the applicant is successfully 
identity-proofed, they are enrolled in the identity service as a subscriber of that CSP. 
A unique subscriber account is then created, and one or more authenticators are 
registered to that account.
Subscribers have a responsibility to maintain control of their authenticators (e.g., guard 
against theft) and comply with CSP policies to remain in good standing with the CSP.
2.2.1.
Subscriber Accounts
At the time of enrollment, the CSP establishes a subscriber account to uniquely identify 
each subscriber and record information about the subscriber and any authenticators 
bound to that subscriber account.
See Sec. 5 of [SP800-63A], subscriber accounts, for more information and normative 
requirements.
2.3.
Authentication and Authenticator Management
[SP800-63B], Authentication and Authenticator Management, provides normative 
descriptions of permitted authenticator types, their characteristics (e.g., phishing 
resistance), and authentication processes appropriate for each AAL.
10

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Fig. 1. Sample Identity Proofing and Enrollment Digital Identity Model
Request Access
Subject
CSP
Applicant
Subscriber
Request Identity Evidence and Attributes
Submit Identity Evidence and Attributes
Identity Service Enrollment 
• ID Prooﬁng
• CSP Subscriber 
Account Creation
• Enrollment Process
2.3.1.
Authenticators
An authenticator is a means of demonstrating the control or possession of one or 
more factors in an authentication protocol. These guidelines define three types of 
authentication factors used for authentication:
• Something you know (e.g., a password)
• Something you have (e.g., a device containing a cryptographic key)
• Something you are (e.g., a fingerprint or other biometric characteristic data)
Single-factor authentication requires only one of the above factors, most often 
“something you know.” Multiple instances of the same factor still constitute single-factor 
authentication. For example, a user-generated PIN and a password do not constitute two 
factors as they are both “something you know.” Multi-factor authentication (MFA) refers 
to the use of more than one distinct factor.
11

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
This guideline specifies that authenticators always contain or comprise a secret. The 
secrets contained in an authenticator are based on either key pairs (i.e., asymmetric 
cryptographic keys) or shared secrets, including symmetric cryptographic keys, seeds 
for generating one-time passwords (OTP), and passwords. Asymmetric key pairs are 
comprised of a public key and a related private key. The private key is stored on the 
authenticator and is only available for use by the claimant who possesses and controls 
the authenticators. Symmetric keys generally are chosen at random, complex and long 
enough to thwart network-based guessing attacks, and stored in hardware or software 
that the subscriber controls.
Passwords used locally as an activation factor for a multi-factor authenticator are 
referred to as activation secrets. An activation secret is used to obtain access to a 
stored authentication key and remains within the authenticator and its associated user 
endpoint. An example of an activation secret would be the PIN used to activate a PIV 
card.
Biometric characteristics are unique, personal attributes that can be used to verify 
the identity of a person who is physically present at the point of authentication. This 
includes, facial features, fingerprints, and iris patterns, among others. While biometric 
characteristics cannot be used for single-factor authentication, they can be used as an 
authentication factor for multi-factor authentication in combination with a physical 
authenticator (i.e., something you have).
Some commonly used authentication methods do not contain or comprise secrets and 
are, therefore, not acceptable for use under these guidelines, such as:
• Knowledge-based authentication (KBA), where the claimant is prompted to answer 
questions that are presumably known only by the claimant, does not constitute an 
acceptable secret for digital authentication.
• A biometric characteristic does not constitute a secret and cannot be used as a 
single-factor authenticator.
2.3.2.
Authentication Process
The authentication process enables an RP to trust that a claimant is who they say they 
are to some level of assurance. The sample authentication process in Fig. 2 shows 
interactions between the RP, a claimant, and a verifier/CSP. The verifier is a functional 
role and is frequently implemented in combination with the CSP, RP, or both (as shown in 
Fig. 4).
A successful authentication process demonstrates that the claimant has possession 
and control of one or more valid authenticators that are bound to the subscriber’s 
identity. In general, this is done using an authentication protocol that involves an 
interaction between the verifier and the claimant, where the claimant uses one or 
more authenticators to generate the authenticator output to be sent to the verifier. The 
12

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Fig. 2. Sample Authentication Process
Request Authentication
Subject
Claimant
Subscriber
Submit authenticator output
Verify 
Authenticator 
Output
Open Authenticated Session
RP
Veriﬁer
Return Authentication Result
verifier verifies the output and passes a positive result to the RP. The RP then opens an 
authenticated session with the verified subscriber.
The exact nature of the interaction is important in determining the overall security 
of the system. Well-designed protocols protect the integrity and confidentiality of 
communication between the claimant and the verifier both during and after the 
authentication and can help limit the damage done by an attacker masquerading as a 
legitimate verifier (i.e., phishing).
2.4.
Federation and Assertions
Normative requirements can be found in [SP800-63C], Federation and Assertions.
Section III of OMB [M-19-17], Enabling Mission Delivery through Improved Identity, 
Credential, and Access Management, directs agencies to support cross-government 
identity federation and interoperability. The term federation can be applied to several 
different approaches that involve the sharing of information between different trust 
domains, and may differ based on the kind of information that is being shared between 
the domains. These guidelines address the federation processes that allow for the 
conveyance of identity and authentication information based on trust agreements across 
a set of networked systems through federation assertions.
13

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
There are many benefits to using federated architectures including, but not limited to:
• Enhancing user experience (e.g., a subject can be identity-proofed once but their 
subscriber account used at multiple RPs)
• Reducing costs for both the subscriber (e.g., reduction in authenticators) and 
the organization (e.g., reduction in information technology infrastructure and a 
streamlined architecture)
• Minimizing data exposed to RPs by using pseudonymous identifiers and derived 
attribute values instead of copying account values to each application
• Supporting mission success, since organizations will need to focus fewer resources 
on complex identity management processes
While the federation process is generally the preferred approach to authentication 
when the RP and IdP are not administered together under a common security domain, 
federation can also be applied within a single security domain for a variety of benefits, 
including centralized account management and technical integration.
These guidelines are agnostic to the identity proofing, authentication, and federation 
architectures that an organization selects, and they allow organizations to deploy 
a digital identity scheme according to their own requirements. However, there are 
scenarios in which federation could be more efficient and effective than establishing 
identity services that are local to the organization or individual applications, such as:
• Potential users already have an authenticator at or above the required AAL.
• Multiple types of authenticators are required to cover all possible user 
communities.
• An organization does not have the necessary infrastructure to support the 
management of subscriber accounts (e.g., account recovery, authenticator 
issuance, help desk).
• There is a desire to allow primary authenticators to be added and upgraded over 
time without changing the RP’s implementation.
• There are different environments to be supported, since federation protocols are 
network-based and allow for implementation on a wide variety of platforms and 
languages.
• Potential users come from multiple communities, each with its own existing 
identity infrastructure.
• The organization needs the ability to centrally manage account life cycles, 
including account revocation and the binding of new authenticators.
14

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
An organization might want to consider accepting federated identity attributes if any of 
the following apply:
• Pseudonymity is required, necessary, feasible, or important to stakeholders 
accessing the service.
• Access to the service requires a defined list of attributes.
• Access to the service requires at least one derived attribute value.
• The organization is not the authoritative or issuing source for required attributes.
• Attributes are required temporarily during use (e.g., to make an access decision), 
and the organization does not need to retain the data.
2.5.
Examples of Digital Identity Models
The entities and interactions that comprise the non-federated digital identity model are 
illustrated in Fig. 3. The general-purpose federated digital identity model is illustrated 
in Fig. 4, and a federated digital identity model with a subscriber-controlled wallet is 
illustrated in Fig. 5.
In the two cases described in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, the verifier does not always need to 
communicate in real time with the CSP to complete the authentication activity (e.g., 
digital certificates can be used). Therefore, the line between the verifier and the CSP 
represents a logical link between the two entities. In some implementations, the verifier, 
RP, and CSP functions are distributed. However, if these functions reside on the same 
platform, the interactions between the functions are signals between applications or 
application modules that run on the same system rather than using network protocols.
2.5.1.
Non-Federated Digital Identity Model
Figure 3 shows an example of a common sequence of interactions in the non-federated 
model. Other sequences could also achieve the same functional requirements. One 
common sequence of interactions for identity proofing and enrollment activities is 
represented as follows:
• Step 1: An applicant applies to a CSP through an identity proofing and enrollment 
process. The CSP identity-proofs that applicant.
• Step 2: Upon successful identity proofing, the applicant is enrolled into the 
identity service as a subscriber.
– A subscriber account and corresponding authenticators are established 
between the CSP and the subscriber. The CSP maintains the subscriber 
account, its status, and the enrollment data. The subscriber maintains their 
authenticators.
15

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Fig. 3. Non-Federated Digital Identity Model Example
Veriﬁer
CSP
Subject
RP
1
2
4
3
5
Identity Prooﬁng 
and Enrollment
Authenticator 
Enrollment / Issuance
Authentication 
Request
Authentication 
Process
Authenticated 
Session
Subject Roles
Applicant
Claimant
Subscriber
Steps 3 through 5 can immediately follow steps 1 and 2 or be done at a later time. The 
usual sequence of interactions involved in using one or more authenticators to perform 
digital authentication in the non-federated model is as follows:
• Step 3: The claimant initiates an online interaction with the RP and the RP 
requests that the claimant authenticate.
• Step 4: The claimant proves possession and control of the authenticators to the 
verifier function through an authentication process:
– The verifier interacts with the CSP to verify the binding of the claimant’s 
identity to their authenticators in the subscriber account and to optionally 
obtain additional subscriber attributes.
– The CSP or verifier functions of the service provider give information about 
the subscriber. The RP requests the attributes that it requires from the CSP. 
The RP optionally uses this information to make authorization decisions.
• Step 5: An authenticated session is established between the subscriber and the RP.
16

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
2.5.2.
Federated Digital Identity Model With General-Purpose IdP
Fig. 4. Federated Digital Identity Model Example
Veriﬁer
CSP
Subject
RP
IdP
1
2
4
3
6
Identity Prooﬁng 
and Enrollment
Authenticator 
Enrollment / Issuance
Federation 
Request
Authentication 
Process
Authenticated 
Session
Federation 
Protocol
5
Subject Roles
Applicant
Claimant
Subscriber
Subscriber
Accounts
Figure 4 shows an example of those same common interactions in a federated model.
• Step 1: An applicant applies to a CSP through an identity proofing and enrollment 
process. The CSP identity-proofs that applicant.
• Step 2: Upon successful identity proofing, the applicant is enrolled in the identity 
service as a subscriber.
– A subscriber account and corresponding authenticators are established 
between the CSP and the subscriber.
– The IdP is provisioned either directly by the CSP or indirectly through 
access to attributes of the subscriber account. The CSP maintains the 
subscriber account, its status, and the enrollment data collected in 
accordance with the records retention and disposal requirements described 
in Sec. 3.1 of [SP800-63A]. The subscriber maintains their authenticators. The 
IdP maintains its view of the subscriber account, any federated identifiers 
assigned to the subscriber account, and any policies and decisions regarding 
the release of attributes and information to RPs.
17

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
The usual sequence of interactions involved in using one or more authenticators in the 
federated model to perform digital authentication is as follows:
• Step 3: The RP requests that the claimant authenticate and requests any attributes 
needed from the IdP to make access or authorization decisions. This triggers a 
request for federated authentication to the IdP.
• Step 4: The claimant proves possession and control of the authenticators to the 
verifier function of the IdP through an authentication process.
– The binding of the claimant’s authenticators are verified with those bound to 
the claimed subscriber account and optionally to obtain additional subscriber 
attributes.
• Step 5: The RP and the IdP communicate through a federation protocol. The IdP 
provides an assertion and any necessary additional attributes to the RP through 
a federation protocol. The RP verifies the assertion to establish confidence in the 
identity and attributes of a subscriber for access to an online service at the RP. RPs 
use a subscriber’s federated identity (pseudonymous or non-pseudonymous), IAL, 
AAL, FAL, and other factors to make authorization decisions.
• Step 6: An authenticated session is established between the subscriber and the RP.
2.5.3.
Federated Digital Identity Model with Subscriber-Controlled Wallet
Figure 5 shows an example of the interactions in a federated digital identity model 
in which the subscriber controls a device with software (i.e., a digital wallet) or an 
account with a cloud service provider (i.e., a hosted-wallet) that acts as the IdP. In the 
terminology of the “three-party model,” the CSP is the issuer, the IdP is the holder (i.e., 
the users device or agent operating on their behalf), and the RP is the verifier. In this 
model, it is common for the RP to establish a trust agreement with the CSP using a 
federation authority, as defined in Sec. 3.5 of [SP800-63C]. This arrangement allows the 
RP to accept assertions from the subscriber-controlled wallet without needing a direct 
trust relationship with the wallet, as described in Sec. 5 of [SP800-63C].
• Step 1: An applicant applies to a CSP identity proofing and enrollment process.
• Step 2: Upon successful identity proofing, the applicant goes through an 
onboarding process and is enrolled in the identity service as a subscriber.
• Step 3: The subscriber-controlled wallet is onboarded by the CSP, allowing the 
wallet to act in the role of IdP in later steps.
– The subscriber authenticates to the CSP’s issuance functionality by 
authenticating to the subscriber account or completes an abbreviated 
proofing process to demonstrate that they are the same user represented 
by the subscriber account.
18

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Fig. 5. Federated Digital Identity Model with Subscriber-Controlled Wallet Example
–
Subject
RP
Subject Roles
Applicant
Claimant
Subscriber
1
2
5
4
7
Identity Prooﬁng 
and Enrollment
Onboarding Process
Federation 
Request
Activation / Authentication
Authenticated 
Session
Federation 
Protocol
6
Subscriber-
Controlled 
Wallet
Attribute Bundle Issuance
3
CSP
The subscriber activates the subscriber-controlled wallet using an activation 
factor.
– The wallet generates or chooses a signing key and corresponding verification 
key, including proof of a key held by the wallet.
– The CSP creates one or more attribute bundles that include subscriber 
attributes and the wallet’s verification key (or a reference to that key).
– The CSP issues the attribute bundle with corresponding verification key into 
the subscriber-controlled wallet.
Other protocols and specifications often refer to attribute bundles 
as credentials. These guidelines use the term credentials to refer to 
a different concept. To avoid a conflict, the term attribute bundle is 
used within these guidelines. Normative requirements for attribute 
bundles can be found in Sec. 3.12.1 of [SP800-63C].
19

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
The usual sequence of interactions involved in providing an assertion to the RP from a 
subscriber-controlled wallet is as follows:
• Step 4: The RP requests that the claimant authenticate. This triggers a request for 
federated authentication to the wallet.
• Step 5: The claimant proves possession and control of the subscriber-controlled 
wallet.
– The claimant activates the wallet using an activation factor or authenticates 
to a hosted service if the subscriber-controlled wallet is hosted by a service 
provider.
– The wallet prepares an assertion that includes the attribute bundle provided 
by the CSP for the subscriber account.
• Step 6: The RP and the wallet communicate through a federation protocol. The 
wallet provides an assertion, the CSP-signed attribute bundles and optional 
additional attributes to the RP through a federation protocol. The RP verifies the 
assertion to establish confidence in the identity and attributes of a subscriber 
for access to an online service at the RP. RPs use a subscriber’s federated identity 
(pseudonymous or non-pseudonymous), IAL, AAL, FAL, and other factors to make 
authorization decisions.
• Step 7: An authenticated session is established between the subscriber and the RP.
20

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
3.
Digital Identity Risk Management
This section is normative.
This section describes the methodology for assessing digital identity risks associated with 
online services, including residual risks to users of the online service, the service provider 
organization, and its mission and business partners. It offers guidance on selecting 
usable, privacy-enhancing security, and anti-fraud controls that mitigate those risks. 
Additionally, it emphasizes the importance of continuously evaluating the performance 
of the selected controls.
The Digital Identity Risk Management (DIRM) process focuses on the identification and 
management of risks according to two dimensions: (1) risks that result from operating 
the online service that might be addressed by an identity system and (2) additional risks 
that are introduced as a result of implementing the identity system.
The first dimension of risk informs initial assurance level selections and seeks to identify 
risks associated with a compromise of the online service that might be addressed by an 
identity system. For example:
• Identity proofing: Negative impacts that could reasonably be expected if an 
imposter were to gain access to a service or receive a credential using the identity 
of a legitimate user (e.g., an attacker successfully impersonates someone)
• Authentication: Negative impacts that could reasonably be expected if a false 
claimant accessed an account that was not rightfully theirs (e.g., an attacker who 
compromises or steals an authenticator), often referred to as an account takeover 
attack
• Federation: Negative impacts that could reasonably be expected if the 
wrong subject successfully accessed an online service, system, or data (e.g., 
compromising or replaying an assertion)
If there are risks associated with a compromise of the online service that could be 
addressed by an identity system, an initial assurance level is selected and the second 
dimension of risk is then considered.
The second dimension of risk seeks to identify the risks posed by the identity system 
itself and informs the tailoring process. Tailoring provides a process to modify an initially 
assessed assurance level, implement compensating or supplemental controls, or modify 
selected controls based on ongoing detailed risk assessments in areas such as privacy, 
usability, and resilience to real-world threats.
Examples of the types of impact that can result from risks introduced by the identity 
system itself include:
21

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
• Identity proofing: Impacts of not successfully identity proofing and enrolling a 
legitimate subject due to barriers faced by the subject throughout the process 
of identity proofing, falling victim to a breach of information that was collected 
and retained to support identity proofing processes, or the initial IAL failing to 
completely address specific threats, threat actors, and fraud
• Authentication: Impacts of failing to authenticate the correct subject due to 
barriers faced by the subject in presenting their authenticator, including barriers 
due to usability issues; the initial AAL failing to completely address targeted 
account takeover models or specific authenticator types fail to mitigate anticipated 
attacks
• Federation: Impacts of releasing real subscriber attributes to the wrong online 
service or system or releasing incorrect or fake attributes to a legitimate RP
The outcomes of the DIRM process depend on the role that an entity plays within the 
digital identity model.
1. For relying parties, the intent of this process is to determine the assurance 
levels and any tailoring required to protect online services and the applications, 
transactions, and systems that comprise or are impacted by those services. This 
directly contributes to the selection, development, and procurement of CSP 
services. Federal RPs SHALL  implement the DIRM process for all online services.
2. For credential service providers and identity providers, the intent of this process 
is to design service offerings that meet the requirements of the defined assurance 
levels, continuously guard against compromises to the identity system, and meet 
the needs of RPs. Whenever a service offering deviates from normative guidance, 
those deviations SHALL  be clearly communicated to the RPs that utilize the 
service.
CSPs and IdPs are expected to offer services at assurance levels that are requested by 
the RPs they serve. However, CSPs and IdPs that choose to deviate from this guideline 
or augment their services are expected to conduct an abbreviated digital identity risk 
assessment and document their modifications in a Digital Identity Acceptance Statement 
that is provided to RPs (see Sec. 3.4.4).
This process augments the risk management processes required by [FISMA]. The results 
of the DIRM impact assessment for the online service may be different from the FISMA 
impact level for the underlying application or system. Identity process failures can result 
in different levels of impact for various user groups. For example, the overall assessed 
FISMA impact level for a payment system may result in a ‘FISMA Moderate’ impact 
category because sensitive financial data is being processed by the system. However, for 
individuals who are making guest payments where no persistent account is established, 
the authentication and proofing impact levels may be lower. Agency authorizing officials 
SHOULD  require documentation that demonstrates adherence to the DIRM process 
22

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
as a part of the authority to operate (ATO) for the underlying information system that 
supports an online service. Agency authorizing officials SHOULD  require documentation 
from CSPs that demonstrates adherence to the DIRM process as part of procurement or 
ATO processes for integration with CSPs.
These guidelines use the term FISMA impact level; other NIST RMF 
publications also use the term system impact level to refer to such 
impact categorization.
There are 5 steps in the DIRM process:
1. Define the online service: As a starting point, the organization documents a 
description of the online service in terms of its functional scope, the user groups 
it is intended to serve, the types of online transactions available to each user 
group, and the underlying data that the online service processes through its 
interfaces. If the online service is one element of a broader business process, its 
role is documented, as are the uses of any data collected and processed by the 
online service. Additionally, an organization needs to determine the entities that 
will be impacted by the online service and the broader business process of which 
it is a part. The outcome is a description of the online service, its users, and the 
entities that may be impacted by its functionality.
2. Conduct initial impact assessment: In this step, organizations assess the impacts 
of a compromise of the online service that might be addressed by an identity 
system (i.e., identity proofing, authentication, or federation). Each function of the 
online service is assessed against a defined set of harms and impact categories. 
Each user group of the online service is considered separately based on the 
transactions available to that user group (i.e., the permissions that the group is 
granted relative to the data and functions of the online service). The outcome of 
this step is a documented set of impact categories and associated impact levels 
that are determined by considering the transactions available to each user group 
of the online service.
3. Select initial assurance levels: In this step, the impact categories and impact levels 
are evaluated to determine the initial assurance levels to protect the online service 
from unauthorized access and fraud. Using the assurance levels, the organization 
identifies the baseline controls for the IAL, AAL, and FAL for each user group 
based on the requirements in companion volumes [SP800-63A], [SP800-63B], and 
[SP800-63C], respectively. The outcome of this step is an identified initial IAL, AAL, 
and FAL, as applicable, for each user group.
4. Tailor and document assurance level determinations: In this step, detailed 
assessments are conducted or leveraged to determine the potential impact of 
the initially selected assurance levels and their associated controls on privacy, 
customer experience, and resistance to the current threat environment. 
23

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Tailoring may result in a modification of the initially assessed assurance level, 
the identification of compensating or supplemental controls (see Sec. 3.4.2 and 
Sec. 3.4.3), or both. All assessments and final decisions are documented and 
justified. The outcome is a Digital Identity Acceptance Statement (see Sec. 3.4.4) 
with a defined and implementable set of assurance levels and a final set of 
controls for the online service.
5. Continuously evaluate and improve: In this step, information on the performance 
of the identity management approach is gathered and evaluated. This evaluation 
considers a diverse set of factors, including business impacts, effects on 
fraud rates, and impacts on user communities. This information is crucial for 
determining whether the selected assurance levels and controls meet mission, 
business, security, and — where applicable — program integrity needs. It also 
helps monitor for unintended harms that impact privacy and access. Opportunities 
for improvement should also be considered by closely monitoring the evolving 
threat landscape and investigating new technologies and methodologies that can 
counter those threats, improve customer experience, or enhance privacy. The 
outcomes of this step are performance metrics, documented and transparent 
processes for evaluation and redress, and ongoing improvements to the identity 
management approach.
Figure 6 illustrates the major actions and outcomes for each step of the DIRM process 
flow. While presented as a stepwise approach, there can be many points in the process 
that require divergence from the sequential order, including the need for iterative 
cycles between initial task execution and revisiting tasks. For example, the introduction 
of new regulations or requirements while an assessment is in progress may require 
organizations to revisit a step in the process. Additionally, new functionalities, changes in 
data usage, and changes to the threat environment may require an organization to revisit 
steps in the DIRM process at any point, including potentially modifying the assurance 
levels and/or the related controls of the online service.
Organizations SHOULD  adapt and modify this overall approach to meet organizational 
processes, governance, and enterprise risk management practices. At a minimum, 
organizations SHALL  execute and document each step and complete and document the 
normative mandates and outcomes of each step, regardless of any organization-specific 
processes or tools used in the overall DIRM process. Additionally, organizations SHOULD  
consult with a representative sample of the online service’s user population to inform 
the design and performance evaluation of the identity management system.
3.1.
Define the Online Service
The purpose of defining the online service is to understand its functionality and establish 
a common understanding of its context, which will inform subsequent steps of the 
DIRM process. The role of the online service is contextualized as part of the broader 
24

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Fig. 6. High-level diagram of the Digital Identity Risk Management Process Flow
25
Step 1: Deﬁne the Online Service
Outcome: Functional Scope; User Groups; Impacted Entities
Step 2: Conduct Initial Impact Assessment for each User Group
Outcome: Combined Impact Level (Low/Mod/High) for each User Group
Determine Impact Levels per Impact Category
Step 3: Select Initial Assurance Levels for each User Group
Outcome: Baseline Controls for Initial IAL/AAL/FAL for each User Group
Map Combined Impact Level to Initial IAL/AAL/FAL and Controls
Step 4: Tailor and Document Assurance Levels for each User Group
Outcome: Digital Identity Acceptance Statement with Final IAL/AAL/FAL and Controls
Using Baseline Controls, Conduct Privacy, Customer Experience, and Threat Assessments
Adjust Initial IAL/AAL/FAL; Select Compensating and Supplemental Controls
Step 5: Continuously Evaluate and Improve
Outcome: Updated Digital Identity Acceptance Statement with Adjustments to Controls
Establish Performance Metrics; Collect Evaluation Inputs; Assess Performance
Implement/Deploy/Adjust Identity Management System for Online Services

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
business environment and associated processes, resulting in a documented description 
of the scope of the online service, user groups and their expectations, data processed, 
impacted entities, and other pertinent details.
RPs SHALL  develop a description of the online service that includes, at minimum:
• The organizational mission and business objectives supported by the online service
• The mission and business partner dependencies associated with the online service
• Legal, regulatory, and contractual requirements, including privacy obligations that 
apply to the online service
• The functionality of the online service and the data that it is expected to process
• User groups that need to have access to the online service as well as the types of 
online transactions and access privileges available to each user group
• The set of entities (to include users of the online service, organizations, and 
populations served) that will be impacted by the online service and the broader 
business process of which it is a part
• The results of any preexisting DIRM assessments (as an input) and the current 
state of any preexisting identity technologies (i.e., proofing, authentication, or 
federation)
• The estimated availability of the types of identity evidence required for identity 
proofing across all user groups served
It is imperative to consider unexpected and undesirable impacts, as well as the scale 
of impact, on different entities that result from an unauthorized user gaining access 
to the online service due to a failure of the digital identity system. For example, if an 
attacker obtained unauthorized access to an online service that controls a power plant, 
the actions taken by the bad actor could have devastating environmental impacts on the 
local populations that live near the facility and cause power outages for the localities 
served by the plant.
It is important to differentiate between user groups and impacted entities, as described 
in this document. The online service will allow access to a set of users who may be 
partitioned into a few user groups based on the kind of functionality that is offered to 
that user group. For example, an online income tax filing and review service may have 
the following user groups: (1) citizens who need to check the status of their personal 
tax returns, (2) tax preparers who file tax returns on behalf of their clients, and (3) 
system administrators who assign privileges to different groups of users or create new 
user groups as needed. Impacted entities include all those who could face negative 
consequences in the event of a digital identity system failure. This will likely include 
members of the user groups but may also include those who never directly use the 
system.
26

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Accordingly, the scope of impact assessments SHALL  include individuals who use the 
online application as well as the organization itself. Additionally, organizations SHALL  
identify other entities (e.g., mission partners, communities, and those identified in 
[SP800-30]) that need to be specifically included based on mission and business needs. 
At a minimum, organizations SHALL  document all impacted entities (both internal and 
external to the organization) when conducting their impact assessments.
The output of this step is a documented description of the online service, including 
a list of the user groups and other entities that are impacted by the functionality 
provided by the online service. This information will serve as a basis and establish 
the context for effectively applying the impact assessments detailed in the following 
sections.
3.2.
Conduct Initial Impact Assessment
This step of the DIRM process addresses the first dimension of risk by identifying the 
risks to the online service that might be addressed by an identity system.
The purpose of the initial impact assessment is to identify the potential adverse impacts 
of failures in identity proofing, authentication, and federation that are specific to 
an online service, yielding an initial set of assurance levels. RPs SHOULD  consider 
historical data and results from user focus groups when performing this step. The impact 
assessment SHALL  include:
• Identifying a set of impact categories and the potential harms for each impact 
category,
• Identifying the levels of impact, and
• Assessing the level of impact for each user group.
The level of impact for each user group identified in Sec. 3.1 SHALL  be considered 
separately based on the transactions available to that user group. This gives 
organizations maximum flexibility in selecting and implementing assurance levels that 
are appropriate for each user group. While impacts to user groups, the organization, and 
other entities are primary considerations for impact assessments, organizations SHOULD  
also consider scale (e.g., number of persons impacted by transactions).
The output of this assessment is a defined impact level (i.e., Low, Moderate, or High) 
for each user group. This serves as the primary input to the initial assurance level 
selection.
3.2.1.
Identify Impact Categories and Potential Harms
While an online service has a discrete set of users and user groups that authenticate 
to access the functionality provided by the service, there may be a much larger set of 
entities that are impacted when imposters and attackers obtain unauthorized access to 
27

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
the online service due to errors in identity proofing, authentication, or federation. In 
Sec. 3.1, such impacted entities are identified and documented as a part of defining the 
online service.
In this step, organizations identify the categories of impact that are applicable to the 
impacted entities for a given online service. At a minimum, organizations SHALL  include 
the following impact categories in their impact assessments:
• Degradation of mission delivery
• Damage to trust, standing, or reputation
• Unauthorized access to information
• Financial loss or liability
• Loss of life or danger to human safety, human health, or environmental health
Organizations SHOULD  include additional impact categories, as appropriate, based on 
their mission and business objectives. Each impact category SHALL  be documented 
and consistently applied when implementing the DIRM process across different online 
services offered by the organization.
Harms refer to any adverse effects that would be experienced by an impacted entity. 
They provide a means to effectively understand the impact categories and how they 
may apply to specific entities impacted by the online service. For each impact category, 
organizations SHALL  consider potential harms for each of the impacted entities 
identified in Sec. 3.1.
Examples of harms associated with each category include:
• Degradation of mission delivery:
– Harms to individuals may include the inability to access government services 
or benefits for which they are eligible.
– Harms to the organization (including the organization offering the online 
service and organizations supported by the online service) may include 
the inability to perform current mission/business functions in a sufficiently 
timely manner, with sufficient confidence and/or correctness, or within 
planned resource constraints, or the inability or limited ability to perform 
mission/business functions in the future.
• Damage to trust, standing, or reputation:
– Harms to individuals may include damage to image or reputation as a result 
of impersonation.
– Harms to the organization may include damage to reputation resulting in the 
fostering of a negative image, the deterioration of existing trust relationships, 
or the inability to forge potential new trust relationships in the future.
28

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
• Unauthorized access to information:
– Harms to individuals may include the breach of personal information or other 
sensitive information that may result in secondary harms, such as financial 
loss, loss of life, physical or psychological injury, impersonation, identity theft, 
or persistent inconvenience.
– Harms to the organization may include the exfiltration, deletion, degradation, 
or exposure of intellectual property or the unauthorized disclosure of other 
information assets, such as classified materials or controlled unclassified 
information (CUI).
• Financial loss or liability:
– Harms to individuals may include debts incurred or assets lost as a result of 
fraud or other harm, damage to or loss of credit, actual or potential loss of 
employment or sources of income, loss of housing, and/or other financial 
loss.
– Harms to the organization may include costs related to fraud or other 
criminal activity, loss of assets, devaluation, or loss of business.
• Loss of life or danger to human safety, human health, or environmental health:
– Harms to individuals may include death or damage to physical well-being 
that may result in secondary harms, such as damage to mental or emotional 
well-being, or impact on environmental health that could result in the 
uninhabitability of the local environment and require intervention to address 
potential or actual damage.
– Harms to the organization may include damage to or loss of the 
organization’s workforce or damage to the surrounding environment and 
the subsequent impact of unsafe conditions.
The outcome of this activity is a list of impact categories and harms that will be used to 
assess adverse consequences for impacted entities.
3.2.2.
Identify Potential Impact Levels
In this step, the organization assesses the potential level of impact caused by an 
unauthorized user gaining access to the online service for each of the impact categories 
selected by the organization (from Sec. 3.2.1). Impact levels are assigned using one of 
the following potential impact values:
• Low: Expected to have a limited adverse effect
• Moderate: Expected to have a serious adverse effect
• High: Expected to have a severe or catastrophic adverse effect
29

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Each user group can have a distinct set of privileges and functionalities through the 
online service. Hence, it is necessary to consider the adverse consequences for each set 
of impacted entities in each of the impact categories, as a result of an intruder obtaining 
unauthorized access as a member of a particular user group. To provide a more objective 
basis for impact level assignments, organizations SHOULD  develop thresholds and 
examples for the impact levels for each impact category. Where this is done, particularly 
with specifically defined quantifiable values, these thresholds SHALL  be documented and 
used consistently in the DIRM assessments across an organization to allow for a common 
understanding of risks.
Examples of potential impacts in each of the impact categories include:
• Degradation of mission delivery:
– Low: Expected to result in limited mission capability degradation such that 
the organization is still able to perform its primary functions but with some 
reduced effectiveness
– Moderate: Expected to result in serious mission capability degradation such 
that the organization is still able to perform its primary functions but with 
significantly reduced effectiveness
– High: Expected to result in severe or catastrophic mission capability 
degradation or loss over a duration such that the organization is unable to 
perform one or more of its primary functions
• Damage to trust, standing, or reputation:
– Low: Expected to result in limited, short-term inconvenience, distress, or 
embarrassment to any party
– Moderate: Expected to result in serious short-term or limited long-term 
inconvenience, distress, or damage to the standing or reputation of any party
– High: Expected to result in severe or serious long-term inconvenience, 
distress, or damage to the standing or reputation of any party or many 
individuals
• Unauthorized access to information:
– Low: Expected to have a limited adverse effect on organizational operations, 
organizational assets, or individuals, as defined in [FIPS199]
– Moderate: Expected to have a serious adverse effect on organizational 
operations, organizational assets, or individuals, as defined in [FIPS199]
– High: Expected to have a severe or catastrophic adverse effect on 
organizational operations, organizational assets, or individuals, as defined 
in [FIPS199]
30

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
• Financial loss or financial liability:
– Low: Expected to result in limited financial loss or liability to any party
– Moderate: Expected to result in a serious financial loss or liability to any 
party
– High: Expected to result in severe or catastrophic financial loss or liability to 
any party
• Loss of life or danger to human safety, human health, or environmental health:
– Low: Expected to result in a limited impact on human safety or health that 
resolves on its own or with a minor amount of medical attention or a limited 
impact on environmental health that requires at most minor intervention to 
prevent further damage or reverse existing damage
– Moderate: Expected to result in a serious impact on human safety or health 
that requires significant medical attention, serious impact on environmental 
health that results in a period of uninhabitability and requires significant 
intervention to prevent further damage or reverse existing damage, or the 
compounding impacts of multiple low-impact events
– High: Expected to result in a severe or catastrophic impact on human safety 
or health, such as severe injury, trauma, or death, a severe or catastrophic 
impact on environmental health that results in long-term or permanent 
uninhabitability and requires extensive intervention to prevent further 
damage or reverse existing damage, or the compounding impacts of multiple 
moderate impact events
This guideline provides three impact levels. However, organizations MAY  define more 
granular impact levels and develop their own methodologies for their initial impact 
assessment activities.
3.2.3.
Impact Analysis
The impact analysis considers the level of impact (i.e., Low, Moderate, or High) 
of compromises of any of the identity system functions (i.e., identity proofing, 
authentication, and federation) that results in an intruder obtaining unauthorized access 
to the online service as a member of a particular user group, and initiating transactions 
that cause negative effects on impacted entities. The impact analysis considers the 
following dimensions:
• User groups (see Sec. 3.1)
• Impacted entities (see Sec. 3.1)
• Impact categories (see Sec. 3.2.1)
31

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
• Impact levels (see Sec. 3.2.2)
The impact analysis SHALL  consider the level of impact for each impact category for each 
type of impacted entity if an intruder obtains unauthorized access as a member of each 
user group. Because different sets of transactions are available to each user group, it is 
important to consider each user group separately for this analysis.
For example, for an online service that allows for the control, operation, and monitoring 
of a water treatment facility, each group of users (e.g., technicians who control 
and operate the facility, auditors and monitoring officials, system administrators) is 
considered separately based on the transactions available to that user group through 
the online service. The impact analysis assesses the level of impact (i.e., Low, Moderate 
or High) on various impacted entities (e.g., citizens who drink the water, the organization 
that owns the facility, auditors, monitoring officials) for each of the impact categories 
being considered if a bad actor obtains unauthorized access to the online service as a 
member of a user group.
The impact analysis SHALL  be performed for each user group that has access to the 
online service. For each impact category, the impact level is estimated for each impacted 
entity as a result of a compromise of the online service caused by failures in the identity 
management functions.
If there is no harm or impact for a given impact category for any entity, the impact level 
can be marked as None.
The output of this impact analysis is a set of impact levels for each user group that
SHALL  be documented in a suitable format for further analysis in accordance with 
Sec. 3.4.
3.2.4.
Determine the Combined Impact Level for Each User Group
The impact assessment levels for each user group are combined to establish a single 
impact level to represent the risks to impacted entities from a compromise of identity 
proofing, authentication, and/or federation functions for that user group.
Organizations can apply a variety of methods for this combinatorial analysis, such as:
• Using a high-water mark approach across the various impact categories and 
impacted entities to derive the effective impact level
• Assigning different weights to different impact categories and/or impacted entities 
and taking an average to derive the effective impact level
• Some other combinatorial logic that aligns with the organization’s mission and 
priorities
32

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Organizations SHALL  document the approach they use to combine their impact 
assessment into an overall impact level for each of their defined user groups and 
SHALL  apply it consistently across all of its online services. At the conclusion of the 
combinatorial analysis, organizations SHALL  document the impact for each user group.
The outcome of this step is an effective impact level for each user group due to a 
compromise of the identity management system functions (i.e., identity proofing, 
authentication, federation).
3.3.
Select Initial Assurance Levels and Baseline Controls
The effective impact level (i.e., Low, Moderate, or High) serves as a primary input to the 
process of selecting the initial assurance level for each user group (see Sec. 3.3.1) to 
identify the corresponding set of baseline digital identity controls from the requirements 
and guidelines in the companion volumes [SP800-63A], [SP800-63B], and [SP800-63C]. 
The resulting initial assurance level for each user group applies to all three digital identity 
system functions (i.e., identity proofing, authentication, and federation).
The initial set of selected digital identity controls and processes will be assessed and 
tailored in Step 4 based on potential risks generated by the identity management system.
3.3.1.
Assurance Levels
Depending on the functionality and deployed architecture of the online service, the 
support of one or more of the identity management functions (i.e., identity proofing, 
authentication, and federation) may be required. The strength of these functions is 
described in terms of assurance levels. The RP SHALL  identify the types of assurance 
levels that apply to their online service from the following:
• IAL: The robustness of the identity proofing process to determine the identity 
of an individual. The IAL is selected to mitigate risks that result from potential 
identity proofing failures.
• AAL: The robustness of the authentication process itself and the binding between 
an authenticator and a specific individual’s identifier. The AAL is selected to 
mitigate risks that result from potential authentication failures.
• FAL: The robustness of the federation process used to communicate 
authentication and attribute information to an RP from an IdP. The FAL is selected 
to mitigate risks that result from potential federation failures.
3.3.2.
Assurance Level Descriptions
A summary of each of the xALs is provided below. While high-level descriptions of 
the assurance levels are provided in this subsection, readers of this guideline are 
encouraged to refer to companion volumes [SP800-63A], [SP800-63B], and [SP800-63C] 
for normative guidelines and requirements for each assurance level.
33

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
3.3.2.1.
Identity Assurance Level
• IAL1: IAL1 supports the real-world existence of the claimed identity and provides 
some assurance that the applicant is associated with that identity. Core attributes 
are obtained from identity evidence or self-asserted by the applicant. All core 
attributes are validated against authoritative or credible sources, and steps are 
taken to link the attributes to the person undergoing the identity proofing process.
• IAL2: IAL2 requires collecting additional evidence and a more rigorous process for 
validating the evidence and verifying the identity.
• IAL3: IAL3 adds the requirement for a trained CSP representative (i.e., proofing 
agent) to interact directly with the applicant, as part of an on-site attended 
identity proofing session, and the collection of at least one biometric.
Table 1 describes the control objectives (i.e., attack protections) for each identity 
assurance level.
34

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Table 1. IAL Summary
IAL
Control Objectives
User Profile
IAL1
Limit highly scalable attacks. 
Protect against synthetic 
identity. Protect against attacks 
that use compromised personal 
information.
Access to personal information 
is required but limited. User 
actions are limited (e.g., viewing 
and making modifications to 
individual personal information). 
Fraud cannot be directly 
perpetrated through available 
user functions. Users cannot 
receive payments until an offline 
or manual process is conducted.
IAL2
Limit scaled and targeted 
attacks. Protect against basic 
evidence falsification and theft. 
Protect against basic social 
engineering.
Users can view and change 
financial information (e.g., 
a direct deposit location). 
Individuals can directly 
perpetrate financial fraud 
through the available application 
functionality. A user can view 
or modify other users’ personal 
information. Users have visibility 
into or access to proprietary 
information.
IAL3
Limit sophisticated attacks. 
Protect against advanced 
evidence falsification, theft, 
and repudiation. Protect against 
advanced social engineering 
attacks.
Users have direct access to 
multiple highly sensitive records; 
administrator access to servers, 
systems, or security data; the 
ability to access large sets of 
data that may reveal sensitive 
information about one or many 
users; or access that could 
result in a breach that would 
constitute a major incident 
under OMB guidance.
3.3.2.2.
Authentication Assurance Level
• AAL1: AAL1 provides basic confidence that the claimant controls an authenticator 
that is bound to the subscriber account. AAL1 requires either single-factor 
or multi-factor authentication using a wide range of available authentication 
35

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
technologies. Verifiers are expected to make multi-factor authentication options 
available at AAL1 and encourage their use. Successful authentication requires the 
claimant to prove possession and control of the authenticator through a secure 
authentication protocol.
• AAL2: AAL2 provides high confidence that the claimant controls one or more 
authenticators that are bound to the subscriber account. Proof of the possession 
and control of two distinct authentication factors is required through the use of 
secure authentication protocols. Approved cryptographic techniques are required.
• AAL3: AAL3 provides very high confidence that the claimant controls 
authenticators that are bound to the subscriber account. Authentication at AAL3 
is based on the proof of possession of a key through the use of a cryptographic 
protocol and either an activation factor or a password. AAL3 authentication 
requires the use of a public-key cryptographic authenticator with a non-exportable 
private key that provides phishing resistance. Approved cryptographic techniques 
are required.
Table 2 describes the control objectives (i.e., attack protections) for each authentication 
assurance level.
Table 2. AAL Summary
AAL
Control Objectives
User Profile
AAL1
Provide minimal protections 
against attacks. Deter password-
focused attacks.
No personal information is 
available to any users, but 
some profile or preference 
data maybe retained to support 
usability and the customization 
of applications.
AAL2
Require multifactor 
authentication. Offer phishing-
resistant options.
Individual personal information 
can be viewed or modified 
by users. Limited proprietary 
information can be viewed by 
users.
AAL3
Require phishing resistance and 
verifier compromise protections.
Highly sensitive information can 
be viewed or modified. Multiple 
proprietary records can be 
viewed or modified by users. 
Privileged user access could 
result in a breach that would 
constitute a major incident 
under OMB guidance.
36

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
3.3.2.3.
Federation Assurance Level
• FAL1: FAL1 provides a basic level of protection for federation transactions and 
supports a wide range of use cases and deployment decisions.
• FAL2: FAL2 provides a high level of protection for federation transactions and 
additional protection against a variety of attacks against federated systems, 
including attempts to inject assertions into a federated transaction.
• FAL3: FAL3 provides a very high level of protection for federation transactions 
and establishes very high confidence that the information communicated in the 
federation transaction matches what was established by the CSP and IdP.
Table 3 describes the control objectives (i.e., attack protections) for each federation 
assurance level.
Table 3. FAL Summary
FAL
Control Objectives
User Profile
FAL1
Protect against forged 
assertions.
No sensitive personal 
information is available to 
any users but some profile or 
preference data may be retained 
to support usability or the 
customization of applications.
FAL2
Protect against forged assertions 
and injection attacks.
Users can access personal 
information and other 
sensitive data with appropriate 
authentication assurance levels 
(e.g., AAL2 or above).
FAL3
Protect against IdP compromise.
Federation primarily supports 
attribute exchange. Users have 
access to classified or highly 
sensitive information or services 
that could result in a breach 
that would constitute a major 
incident under OMB guidance.
37

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
3.3.3.
Initial Assurance Level Selection
Organizations SHALL  develop and document a process and governance model for 
selecting initial assurance levels and controls based on the potential impacts of failures 
in the digital identity system. The following subsections provide guidance on the major 
elements to consider in the process for selecting initial assurance levels.
The overall impact level for each user group is used as the basis for selecting the initial 
assurance level and related technical and process controls for the online service under 
assessment based on the impacts of failures within the digital identity functions. The 
initial assurance levels and controls can be further assessed and tailored in the next step 
of the DIRM process.
Although the initial impact assessment (see Sec. 3.2) and the combined impact level 
determination for each user group (see Sec. 3.2.4) do not differentiate between identity 
proofing, authentication, and federation risks, the selected initial xALs may still be 
different. For example, the initial impact assessment may be low impact and indicate 
IAL1 and FAL1 but may also determine that personal information is accessible and 
therefore requires AAL2. Similarly, the impact assessment may determine that no 
proofing is required, resulting in no IAL regardless of the baselines for authentication and 
federation. Further changes may result from the tailoring process as discussed in Step 4: 
Tailoring.
The output of this step is a set of initial xALs that are applicable to the online service 
for each user group.
3.3.3.1.
Selecting Initial IAL
Before selecting an initial assurance level, RPs must determine whether identity proofing 
is needed for the users of their online services. Identity proofing is not required if the 
online service does not need any personal information to execute digital transactions. 
If personal information is needed, the RP must determine whether validated attributes 
are required or if self-asserted attributes are acceptable. The system may also be able 
to operate without identity proofing if the potential harms from accepting self-asserted 
attributes are insignificant. In such cases, the identity proofing processes described in 
[SP800-63A] are not applicable to the system.
If the online service does require identity proofing, an initial IAL is selected through a 
simple mapping process:
• Low impact: IAL1
• Moderate impact: IAL2
• High impact: IAL3
38

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
The organization SHALL  document whether identity proofing is required for their 
application and, if it is, SHALL  select an initial IAL for each user group based on the 
effective impact level determination from Sec. 3.2.4.
The IAL reflects the level of assurance that an applicant holds the claimed real-life 
identity. The initial selection assumes that higher potential impacts of failures in the 
identity proofing process should be mitigated by higher assurance processes.
3.3.3.2.
Selecting Initial AAL
Authentication is needed for online services that offer access to personal information, 
protected information, or subscriber accounts. Organizations should consider the 
legal, regulatory, or policy requirements that govern online services when making 
decisions regarding the application of authentication assurance levels and authentication 
mechanisms. For example, [EO13681] states that “all organizations making personal data 
accessible to citizens through digital applications require the use of multiple factors of 
authentication,” which requires a minimum selection of AAL2 for applications that meet 
those criteria.
If the online service requires authentication to be implemented, an initial AAL is selected 
through a simple mapping process:
• Low impact: AAL1
• Moderate impact: AAL2
• High impact: AAL3
The organization SHALL  document whether authentication is needed for their online 
service and, if it is, SHALL  select an initial AAL for each user group based on the effective 
impact level determination from Sec. 3.2.4.
The AAL reflects the level of assurance that the claimant is the same individual to whom 
the authenticator was registered. The initial selection assumes that higher potential 
impacts of failures in the authentication process should be mitigated by higher assurance 
processes.
3.3.3.3.
Selecting Initial FAL
Identity federation brings many benefits, including a convenient customer experience 
that avoids redundant, costly, and often time-consuming identity processes. The benefits 
of federation through a general-purpose IdP model or a subscriber-controlled wallet 
model are covered in Sec. 5 of [SP800-63C]. However, not all online services will be able 
to make use of federation, whether for risk-based reasons or due to legal or regulatory 
requirements. Consistent with [M-19-17], federal agencies that operate online services 
SHOULD  implement federation as an option for user access.
39

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
If the online service implements identity federation, an initial FAL is selected through a 
simple mapping process:
• Low impact: FAL1
• Moderate impact: FAL2
• High impact: FAL2 or FAL3
The organization SHALL  document whether federation will be used for their online 
service and, if it is, SHALL  select an initial FAL for each user group based on the effective 
impact level determination from Sec. 3.2.4.
For online services that are assessed to be high impact, organizations SHALL  conduct 
a further assessment to evaluate the risk of a compromised IdP to determine whether 
FAL2 or FAL3 is more appropriate for their use case. Considerations SHOULD  include the 
type of data being accessed, the location of the IdP (e.g., whether the IdP is internal or 
external to their enterprise boundary), and the availability of bound authenticators or 
holder-of-key capabilities.
The FAL reflects the level of assurance in identity assertions that convey the results of 
authentication processes and relevant identity information to RP online services. The 
preliminary selection assumes that higher potential impacts of failures in federated 
identity architectures should be mitigated by higher assurance processes.
3.3.4.
Identify Baseline Controls
The selection of the initial assurance levels for each user group and each of the 
applicable identity functions (i.e., IAL, AAL, and FAL) serves as the basis for selecting the 
baseline digital identity controls from the guidelines in companion volumes [SP800-63A], 
[SP800-63B], and [SP800-63C]. As described in Sec. 3.4, the baseline controls include 
technical and process controls that will be assessed against additional potential impacts.
Using the initial xALs selected in Sec. 3.3.3, the organization SHALL  identify the 
applicable baseline controls for each user group as follows:
• Initial IAL and related technical and process controls from [SP800-63A]
• Initial AAL and related technical and process controls from [SP800-63B]
• Initial FAL and related technical and process controls from [SP800-63C]
While online service providers must assess and determine the xALs that are appropriate 
for protecting their applications, the selection of these assurance levels does not 
mean that the online service provider must implement the related technical and 
process controls independently. Based on the identity model that the online service 
provider implements, some or all of the assurance levels and related controls may be 
implemented by an external entity, such as a third-party CSP or IdP.
The output of this step is a set of assigned xALs and baseline controls for each user 
group.
40

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
3.4.
Tailor and Document Assurance Levels
The second dimension of risk addressed by the DIRM process focuses on risks from the 
identity management system that represent the unintended negative consequences of 
the initial selection of xALs and related technical and process controls in Sec. 3.3.4.
Tailoring provides a process to modify an initially assessed assurance level and 
implement compensating or supplemental controls based on ongoing detailed risk 
assessments. It provides a pathway for flexibility and enables organizations to achieve 
risk management objectives that align with their specific context, users, and threat 
environments. This process focuses on assessing the risks posed by the identity system 
itself, specific environmental threats, and privacy and customer experience impacts. It 
does not prioritize any specific risk area or outcomes for organizations. Making decisions 
that balance different types of risks to meet organizational outcomes remains the 
responsibility of organizations.
While organizations are required to implement and document 
a tailoring process, this guideline does not require the initial 
assurance levels or control sets to be modified as a result. However, 
organizations are expected to complete the assessments in the 
tailoring section to fully account for the outcomes of their selected 
initial assurance levels.
Within the tailoring step, organizations SHALL  focus on impacts to mission delivery due 
to the implementation of identity management controls, including the possibility of 
legitimate users who are unable to access desired online services or experience sufficient 
friction or frustration with the identity system (and technology selection) that they 
abandon attempts to access the online service.
As a part of the tailoring process, organizations SHALL  review the Digital Identity 
Acceptance Statements and practice statements2
2Further information on practice statements and their contents can be found in Sec. 3.1 of SP 800-63A.
 from CSPs and IdPs that they use 
or intend to use. However, organizations SHALL  also conduct their own analysis to 
ensure that the organization’s specific mission and the communities being served by 
the online service are given due consideration for tailoring purposes. As a result, the 
organization MAY  require their chosen CSP to strengthen or provide optionality in the 
implementation of certain controls to address risks and unintended impacts to the 
organization’s mission and the communities served.
To promote interoperability and consistency, organizations SHOULD  implement their 
assessed or tailored xALs consistent with the normative guidance in this document. 
However, these guidelines provide flexibility to allow organizations to tailor the initial 
xALs and related controls to meet specific mission needs, address unique risk appetites, 
and provide secure and accessible online services. In doing so, CSPs MAY  offer and 
41

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
organizations MAY  utilize tailored sets of controls that differ from the normative 
statements in this guideline.
Organizations SHALL  establish and document their xAL tailoring process. At a minimum, 
this process:
•
SHALL  follow a documented governance approach to allow for decision-making
•
SHALL  document all decisions in the tailoring process, including the assessed xALs, 
modified xALs, and supplemental and compensating controls in the Digital Identity 
Acceptance Statement (see Sec. 3.4.4)
•
SHALL  justify and document all risk-based decisions or modifications to the initially 
assessed xALs in the Digital Identity Acceptance Statement (see Sec. 3.4.4)
•
SHOULD  establish a cross-functional capability to support subject-matter analysis 
of xAL selection impacts in the tailoring process (e.g., subject-matter experts who 
can speak about risks and considerations related to privacy, customer experience, 
fraud and impersonation impacts, and other germane areas)
The tailoring process promotes a structured means of balancing risks and impacts while 
protecting online services, systems, and data in a manner that enables mission success 
and supports security, customer experience, and privacy for individuals.
3.4.1.
Assess Privacy, Customer Experience, and Threat Resistance
When selecting and tailoring assurance levels for specific online services, considerations 
extend beyond the initial impact assessment in Sec. 3.2. When progressing from 
the initial assurance level selection in Sec. 3.3.4 to the final xAL selection and 
implementation, organizations SHALL  conduct detailed assessments of the controls 
defined for the initially selected xALs to identify potential impacts in the operational 
environment.
At a minimum, organizations SHALL  assess the impacts and potential unintended 
consequences related to the following areas:
• Privacy – Identify unintended consequences to the privacy of individuals who 
will be subject to the controls at an assessed xAL and of individuals affected by 
organizational or third-party practices related to the establishment, management, 
or federation of a digital identity. A privacy assessment SHOULD  leverage an 
existing Privacy Threshold Analysis (PTA) or Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) as 
inputs during the privacy assessment process.3
3For more information about privacy risk assessments, refer to the NIST Privacy Framework: A 
Tool for Improving Privacy through Enterprise Risk Management at https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nist-
pubs/CSWP/NIST.CSWP.01162020.pdf.
 However, as the goal of the privacy 
assessment is to identify privacy risks that arise from the initial assurance level 
42

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
selection, additional assessments and evaluations that are specific to the baseline 
controls for the assurance levels may be required for the underlying information 
system.
• Customer Experience – Determine whether implementation of the initial 
assurance levels may create substantial or unacceptable barriers to individuals 
seeking to access services. Customer experience assessments SHALL  consider 
impacts that result from the identity management controls to ensure that they do 
not cause undue burdens, frustrations, or frictions for individuals and that there 
are pathways to provide service to users of all capabilities, resources, technology 
access, and economic statuses.
• Threat Resistance – Determine whether the defined assurance level and related 
controls will address specific threats to the online service based on the operational 
environment, its threat actors, and known tactics, techniques, and procedures 
(TTPs). Threat assessments SHALL  consider specific known and potential threats, 
threat actors, and TTPs within the implementation environment for the identity 
management functions. For example, certain benefits programs may be more 
subject to familial threats or collusion. Based on their assessments, organizations 
MAY  implement supplemental controls specific to the communities served by 
their online service. Conversely, organizations MAY  tailor their assessed xAL 
down or modify their baseline controls if their threat assessment indicates that 
a reduced threat posture is appropriate based on their environment.
Organizations SHOULD  leverage consultation and feedback from the entities and 
communities served to ensure that the tailoring process addresses their known 
constraints.
Organizations SHOULD  also conduct additional business-specific assessments as 
appropriate to fully represent mission- and domain-specific considerations that have 
not been captured here. All assessments applied during the tailoring phase SHALL  be 
extended to any compensating or supplemental controls, as defined in Sec. 3.4.2 and 
Sec. 3.4.3. While identity system costs are not specifically included as an input for DIRM 
processes or as a metric for continuous evaluation, the costs and cost effectiveness of 
implementation and long-term operation are inherent considerations for responsible 
program and risk management. Based on their available funding and resources, 
organizations will likely need to make trade-offs that can be more effectively informed by 
the DIRM process and its outputs. Any cost-based decisions that result in modifications 
to assessed xALs or baseline controls SHALL be documented in the Digital Identity 
Acceptance Statement (see Sec. 3.4.4).
The outcome of this step is a set of risk assessments for privacy, customer experience, 
threat resistance, and other dimensions that inform the tailoring of the initial 
assurance levels and the selection of compensating and supplemental controls.
43

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
3.4.2.
Identify Compensating Controls
A compensating control is a management, operational, or technical control employed 
by an organization in lieu of a normative control (i.e., SHALL  statements) in the defined 
xALs. To the greatest degree practicable, a compensating control is intended to address 
the same risks as the baseline control it is replacing. Organizations MAY  choose to 
implement a compensating control if they are unable to implement a baseline control 
or when a risk assessment indicates that a compensating control sufficiently mitigates 
risk in alignment with organizational risk tolerance. This control MAY  be a modification 
to the normative statements defined in these guidelines or MAY  be applied elsewhere in 
an online service, digital transaction, or service life cycle. For example:
• A federal agency could choose to use a federal background investigation and 
checks [FIPS201] to compensate for the identity evidence validation with 
authoritative sources requirement under these guidelines.
• An organization could choose to implement stricter auditing and transactional 
review processes on a payment application where verification processes using 
weaker forms of identity evidence were accepted due to the lack of required 
evidence in the end-user population.
Where compensating controls are implemented, organizations SHALL  document the 
compensating control, the rationale for the deviation, comparability of the chosen 
alternative, and any resulting residual risks. CSPs and IdPs that implement compensating 
controls SHALL  communicate this information to all potential RPs prior to integration to 
allow the RP to assess and determine the acceptability of the compensating controls for 
their use cases.
The process of tailoring allows organizations and service providers to make risk-based 
decisions regarding how they implement their xALs and related controls. It also provides 
a mechanism for documenting and communicating decisions through the Digital Identity 
Acceptance Statement described in Sec. 3.4.4.
3.4.3.
Identify Supplemental Controls
Supplemental controls may be added to further strengthen the baseline controls 
specified for the organization’s selected assurance levels. Organizations SHOULD  identify 
and implement supplemental controls to address specific threats in the operational 
environment that may not be addressed by the baseline controls. For example:
• To complete the proofing process, an organization could choose to verify an 
individual against additional pieces of identity evidence beyond what is required 
by the assurance level due to a high prevalence of fraudulent attempts.
• An organization could restrict users to only phishing-resistant authentication at 
AAL2.
44

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
• An organization could choose to implement risk-scoring analytics and re-proofing 
mechanisms to confirm a user’s identity when their access attempts exhibit certain 
risk factors.
Any supplemental controls SHALL  be assessed for impacts based on the same factors 
used to tailor the organization’s assurance level and SHALL  be documented.
3.4.4.
Digital Identity Acceptance Statement
Organizations SHALL  develop a Digital Identity Acceptance Statement (DIAS) to 
document the results of the DIRM process for (i) each online service managed by 
the organization, and (ii) each external online service used to support the mission 
of the organization, including software-as-a-service offerings (e.g., social media 
platforms, email services, online marketing services). RPs who intend to use a particular 
CSP/IdP SHALL  review the latter’s DIAS and incorporate relevant information into the 
organization’s DIAS for each online service.
Organizations SHALL  prepare a DIAS for their online service that includes, at a minimum:
• Initial impact assessment results,
• Initially assessed xALs,
• Tailored xAL and rationale if the tailored xAL differs from the initially assessed xAL,
• All compensating controls with their comparability or residual risks, and
• All supplemental controls.
Federal agencies SHOULD  include this information in the information system 
authorization package described in [NISTRMF].
CSPs/IdPs SHALL  implement the DIRM process and develop a DIAS for the services they 
offer if they deviate from the normative guidance in these guidelines, including when 
supplemental or compensating controls are added. To complete a DIRM of their offered 
assurance levels and controls, CSPs/IdPs MAY  base their assessment on anticipated or 
representative digital identity services that they wish to support. In creating this risk 
assessment, they SHOULD  seek input from real-world RPs on their user populations and 
anticipated context. The DIAS prepared by a CSP SHALL  include, at a minimum:
• Claimed xAL, related controls, and rationale for any deviations from normative 
guidance;
• All compensating controls with their comparability or residual risks; and
• All supplemental controls.
45

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
The DIRM process for external online services used by the organization SHALL  consider 
relevant inputs from the provider of the service and document the results in a DIAS. 
The DIAS prepared by the organization for external online services SHALL  include, at a 
minimum:
• Assessed xAL, related controls, and rationale for any deviations from normative 
guidance;
• All compensating controls with their comparability or residual risks; and
• All supplemental controls.
The final implemented xALs do not all need to be at the same level. 
There may be variance based on the functions of the online service, 
the impact assessment, and the tailoring process.
3.5.
Continuously Evaluate and Improve
Continuous improvement is a critical tool for keeping pace with the threat and 
technology environment and identifying programmatic gaps that need to be addressed 
to balance risk management objectives. For instance, an organization may determine 
that a portion of the target population intended to be served by the online service 
does not have access to affordable high-speed internet services, which are needed to 
support remote identity proofing. The organization could bridge this gap by establishing 
a program that offers local, in-person proofing services within the community. This could 
involve providing appointments with proofing agents who can meet individuals at more 
accessible locations, such as their local community center, the nearest post office, a 
partner business facility, or even at the individual’s home.
To address the shifting environment in which they operate and more rapidly address 
service capability gaps, organizations SHALL  implement a continuous evaluation and 
improvement program that leverages input from end users who have interacted with the 
identity management system as well as performance metrics for the online service. This 
program SHALL  be documented, including the metrics that are collected, the sources of 
data required to enable performance evaluation, and the processes in place for taking 
timely actions based on the continuous improvement process. This program and its 
effectiveness SHOULD  be assessed on a regular basis to ensure that outcomes are being 
achieved and that programs are addressing issues in a timely manner.
Additionally, organizations SHALL  monitor the evolving threat landscape to stay 
informed of the latest threats and fraud tactics. Organizations SHALL  regularly assess 
the effectiveness of current security measures and fraud detection capabilities against 
the latest threats and fraud tactics.
46

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
3.5.1.
Evaluation Inputs
To fully understand the performance of their identity system, organizations will need 
to identify critical inputs to their continuous evaluation process. At a minimum, these 
inputs SHALL  include:
• Integrated CSP, IdP, and authentication functions as well as validation, verification, 
and fraud management systems, as appropriate
• Customer feedback mechanisms, such as complaint processes, helpdesk statistics, 
and other user feedback (e.g., surveys, interviews, or focus groups)
• Threat analysis, threat reporting, and threat intelligence feeds that are available
• Fraud trends, fraud investigation results, and fraud metrics as available
• The results of ongoing customer experience assessments and privacy assessments
RPs SHALL  document their metrics, reporting requirements, and data inputs for any CSP, 
IdP, or other integrated identity service to ensure that expectations are appropriately 
communicated to partners and vendors.
3.5.2.
Performance Metrics
The exact metrics available to organizations will vary based on the technologies, 
architectures, and deployment methods they use. Additionally, the availability and 
usefulness of certain metrics will vary over time. Therefore, these guidelines do not 
attempt to define a comprehensive set of metrics for all scenarios. Table 4 provides a set 
of recommended metrics that organizations SHOULD  track as part of their continuous 
evaluation program. However, organizations are not constrained by this table and 
SHOULD  implement metrics based on their specific systems, technology, and program 
needs. See [SP800-55V2] for more information on identifying additional performance 
metrics. In Table 4, all references to unique users include both legitimate users and 
imposters.
Table 4. Performance Metrics
Title
Description
Type
Pass Rate (Overall)
Percentage of unique users who 
successfully complete identity proofing
Proofing
Pass Rate (Per Proofing 
Type)
Percentage of unique users who are 
successfully proofed for each offered 
type (i.e., remote unattended, remote 
attended, on-site attended, on-site 
unattended)
Proofing
Continued on next page 
47

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Continued from previous page
Title
Description
Type
Fail Rate (Overall)
Percentage of unique users who start 
the identity proofing process but are 
unable to successfully complete all of 
the steps
Proofing
Estimated Adjusted Fail 
Rate
Percentage of failures adjusted to 
account for identity proofing attempts 
that are suspected to be fraudulent
Proofing
Fail Rate (Per Proofing 
Type)
Percentage of unique users who 
do not complete proofing due to a 
process failure for each offered type 
(i.e., remote unattended, remote 
attended, on-site attended, on-site 
unattended)
Proofing
Abandonment Rate 
(Overall)
Percentage of unique users who start 
the identity proofing process but 
do not complete it without failing a 
process
Proofing
Abandonment Rate (Per 
Proofing Type)
Percentage of unique users who start 
a specific type of identity proofing 
process but do not complete it without 
failing a process
Proofing
Failure Rates (Per 
Proofing Process Step)
Percentage of unique users who are 
unsuccessful at completing each 
identity proofing step in a CSP process
Proofing
Completion Times (Per 
Proofing Type)
Average time that it takes a user to 
complete each defined proofing type 
offered as part of an identity service
Proofing
Authenticator Type 
Usage
Percentage of subscribers who have 
an active authenticator by each type 
available
Authentication
Authentication Failures
Percentage of authentication events 
that fail (not to include authentication 
attempts that are successful after re-
entry of an authenticator output)
Authentication
Account Recovery 
Attempts
The number of account or 
authenticator recovery processes 
initiated by subscribers
Authentication
Continued on next page 
48

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Continued from previous page
Title
Description
Type
Confirmed 
Unauthorized Access 
or Fraud
Percentage of total transaction events 
(i.e., identity proofing + authentication 
events) that the organization 
determines to be unauthorized or 
fraudulent through analysis or self-
reporting
Fraud
Suspected 
Unauthorized Access 
or Fraud
Percentage of total transaction events 
(i.e., identity proofing + authentication 
events) that are suspected to be 
unauthorized or fraudulent
Fraud
Reported Unauthorized 
Access or Fraud
Percentage of total transaction events 
(i.e., identity proofing + authentication 
events) reported to be unauthorized 
or fraudulent by users
Fraud
Unauthorized Access 
or Fraud (Per Proofing 
Type)
Number of identity proofing events 
that are suspected or reported as 
being fraudulent for each available 
type of proofing
Fraud
Unauthorized 
Access or Fraud (Per 
Authentication Type)
Number of authentication events 
that are suspected or reported to be 
unauthorized or fraudulent by each 
available type of authentication
Fraud
Help Desk Calls
Number of calls received by the CSP or 
identity service
Customer Experience
Help Desk Calls (Per 
Type)
Number of calls received related to 
each offered service (e.g., proofing 
failures, authenticator resets, 
complaints)
Customer Experience
Help Desk Resolution 
Times
Average length of time that it takes to 
resolve a complaint or help desk ticket
Customer Experience
Customer Satisfaction 
Surveys
The results of customer feedback 
surveys conducted by CSPs, RP, or both
Customer Experience
Redress Requests
The number of redress requests 
received related to the identity 
management system
Customer Experience
Redress Resolution 
Times
The average time it takes to resolve 
redress requests related to the identity 
management system
Customer Experience
49

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
The data used to generate continuous evaluation metrics may not always reside with 
the identity program or the organizational entity responsible for identity management 
systems. The intent of these metrics is to integrate with existing data sources whenever 
possible to collect information that is critical to identity program evaluation. For 
example, customer service representative (CSR) teams may already have substantial 
information on customer requests, complaints, or concerns. Organizations that 
implement and maintain identity management systems are expected to coordinate with 
these teams to acquire the information needed to discern identity management system-
related complaints or issues.
3.5.3.
Measurement in Support of Customer Experience Outcomes
A primary goal of continuous improvement is to enhance customer experience, usability, 
and accessibility outcomes for different user populations. As a result, the metrics 
collected by organizations SHOULD  be further evaluated to provide insights into the 
performance of their identity management systems for their supported communities. 
Where possible, these efforts SHOULD  avoid the collection of additional personal 
information and instead use informed analyses of proxy data to identify potential 
performance issues. This can include comparing and filtering the metrics to understand 
deviations in performance across different user populations based on other available 
data, such as zip code, geographic region, age, or sex.
3.6.
Redress
Designing services that support a wide range of populations requires processes to 
adjudicate issues and provide redress4
4Redress generally refers to a remedy that is made after harm occurs.
 as warranted. Service failures, disputes, and 
other issues tend to arise as part of normal operations, and their impacts can vary 
broadly, from minor inconveniences to major disruptions or damage. Furthermore, 
the same issue experienced by one person or community as an inconvenience can have 
disproportionately damaging impacts on other individuals and communities.
To enable access to critical online services while deterring identity-related fraud and 
cybersecurity threats, it is essential for organizations to plan for potential issues and to 
design redress approaches that aim to be fair, transparent, easy for legitimate claimants 
to navigate, and resistant to exploitation attempts.
Understanding when and how harms might be occurring is a critical first step for 
organizations to take informed action. Continuous evaluation and improvement 
programs can play a key role in identifying instances and patterns of potential harm. 
Moreover, there may be business processes in place outside of those established 
to support identity management that can be leveraged as part of a comprehensive 
approach to issue adjudication and redress. Beyond these activities, additional practices 
can be implemented to ensure that users of identity management systems are able 
50

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
to voice their concerns and have a path to redress. Requirements for these practices 
include:
• RPs and CSPs SHALL  enable individuals to convey grievances and seek redress 
through an issue handling process that is documented, accessible, trackable, and 
usable by all individuals and whose instructions are easy to find on a public-facing 
website.
• RPs and CSPs SHALL  institute a governance model for implementing this issue 
handling process, including documented roles and responsibilities.
• The issue handling process SHALL  be implemented as a dedicated function that 
includes procedures for:
– Impartially reviewing pertinent evidence,
– Requesting and collecting additional evidence that informs the issues, and
– Expeditiously resolving issues and determining corrective action.
• RPs and CSPs SHALL  make human support personnel available to intervene and 
override issue adjudication outputs generated by algorithmic support mechanisms.
• RPs and CSPs SHALL  educate support personnel on issue handling procedures 
for the digital identity management system, the avenues for redress, and the 
alternatives available to gain access to services.
• RPs and CSPs SHALL  implement a process for personnel and technologies that 
provides support functions to report and address major barriers that end users 
face and grievances they may have.
• RPs and CSPs SHALL  incorporate findings derived from the issue handling process 
into continuous evaluation and improvement activities.
Organizations are encouraged to consider these and other emerging redress practices. 
Prior to adopting any new redress practice, including supporting technology, 
organizations SHOULD  test the practice with users to avoid the introduction of 
unintended consequences, particularly those that may counteract or contradict the 
goals associated with redress. In addition, organizations SHALL  assess the integrity and 
performance of their redress mechanisms and implement controls to prevent, detect, 
and remediate attempted identity fraud involving those mechanisms.
3.7.
Cybersecurity, Fraud, and Identity Program Integrity
The close coordination of identity functions with teams that are responsible for 
cybersecurity, privacy, threat intelligence, fraud detection, and program integrity enables 
a more complete protection of business capabilities and constant improvement. For 
example, payment fraud data collected by program integrity teams could provide 
indicators of compromised subscriber accounts and potential weaknesses in identity 
51

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
proofing implementations. Similarly, threat intelligence teams may learn of new 
TTPs that could impact identity proofing, authentication, and federation processes. 
Organizations SHALL  establish consistent mechanisms for the exchange of information 
between stakeholers that are responsible for critical internal security and fraud 
prevention. Organizations SHOULD  do the same for external stakeholders and identity 
services that comprise their online services.
When organizations are supported by external identity providers (e.g., CSPs), the 
exchange of data related to security, fraud, and other RP functions may be complicated 
by regulations or policy. However, establishing the necessary mechanisms and guidelines 
to enable effective information sharing SHOULD  be considered in contractual and 
legal mechanisms. All data collected, transmitted, or shared by the identity service 
provider SHALL  be subject to a detailed privacy and legal assessment by either the entity 
generating the data (e.g., a CSP) or the related RP for whom the service is provided.
Coordination and integration with various organizational functional teams can help 
to achieve better outcomes for the identity functions. Ideally, such coordination 
is performed throughout the risk management process and operations life cycle. 
Companion volumes [SP800-63A], [SP800-63B], and [SP800-63C] provide specific fraud 
mitigation requirements related to each of the identity functions.
3.8.
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Identity Systems
Identity solutions use artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) in various 
ways, such as improving the performance of biometric matching systems, automating 
evidence or attribute validation, detecting fraud, and even assisting users (e.g., 
chatbots). While the potential applications of AI and ML are extensive, these 
technologies may also introduce new risks or produce unintended negative outcomes.
The following requirements apply to all uses of AI and ML in the identity system, 
regardless of how they are used:
• All uses of AI/ML SHALL  be documented and communicated to organizations that 
rely on these systems. The use of integrated technologies that leverage AI/ML by 
CSPs, IdPs, or verifiers SHALL  be disclosed to all RPs that make access decisions 
based on information from these systems.
• All organizations that use AI/ML SHALL  provide information to any entities 
that use their technology on the methods and techniques used for training 
their models, a description of the data sets used in training, information on the 
frequency of model updates, and the results of all testing completed on their 
algorithms.
• All organizations that use AI/ML systems or rely on services that use these systems 
SHOULD  implement the NIST AI Risk Management Framework ([NISTAIRMF]) to 
evaluate the risks that may be introduced by such systems.
52

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
• All organizations that use AI/ML systems or rely on services that use these systems 
SHALL  perform and document privacy risk assessments for personal information 
and data processed by such systems.
53

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
References
This section is informative.
[EO13681] Obama B (2014) Improving the Security of Consumer Financial Transactions. 
(The White House, Washington, DC), Executive Order 13681, October 17, 2014. Available 
at https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2014-25439
[FIPS199] National Institute of Standards and Technology (2004) Standards for Security 
Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems. (U.S. Department of 
Commerce, Washington, DC), Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 
(FIPS) 199. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.199
[U.S.C3552] 44 U.S.C. 3552 - Definitions - Content Details - USCODE-2014-title44-chap35-
subchapII-sec3552 Available at https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/USCODE-2014-
title44/USCODE-2014-title44-chap35-subchapII-sec3552
[FIPS201] National Institute of Standards and Technology (2022) Personal Identity 
Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees and Contractors. (U.S. Department of Commerce, 
Washington, DC), Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS) 201-3. 
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.201-3
[FISMA] Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014, Pub. L. 113-283, 128 
Stat. 3073. Available at https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/PLAW-113publ283
[ISO/IEC9241-11] International Standards Organization (2018) ISO/IEC 9241-11 
Ergonomics of human-system interaction – Part 11: Usability: Definitions and concepts
(ISO, Geneva, Switzerland). Available at https://www.iso.org/standard/63500.html
[M-03-22] Office of Management and Budget (2003) OMB Guidance for Implementing 
the Privacy Provisions of the E-Government Act of 2002. (The White House, Washington, 
DC), OMB Memorandum M-03-22, September 26, 2003. Available at https://
georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/omb/memoranda/m03-22.html
[M-19-17] Office of Management and Budget (2019) Enabling Mission Delivery through 
Improved Identity, Credential, and Access Management. (The White House, Washington, 
DC), OMB Memorandum M-19-17, May 21, 2019. Available at https://www.whitehouse.
gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/M-19-17.pdf
[NISTAIRMF] Tabassi E (2023) Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI 
RMF 1.0). (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST AI 
100-1. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.AI.100-1
[NISTIR8062] Brooks SW, Garcia ME, Lefkovitz NB, Lightman S, Nadeau EM (2017) An 
Introduction to Privacy Engineering and Risk Management in Federal Systems. (National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Interagency or Internal 
Report (IR) NIST IR 8062. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8062
54

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
[NISTRMF] Joint Task Force (2018) Risk Management Framework for Information Systems 
and Organizations: A System Life Cycle Approach for Security and Privacy. (National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) 
NIST SP 800-37r2. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-37r2
[NISTPF] National Institute of Standards and Technology (2020) NIST Privacy Framework: 
A Tool for Improving Privacy Through Enterprise Risk Management, Version 1.0. 
(National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Cybersecurity 
White Paper (CSWP) NIST CSWP 10. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.CSWP.10
[PrivacyAct] Privacy Act of 1974, Pub. L. 93-579, 5 U.S.C. § 552a, 88 Stat. 1896 (1974). 
Available at https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2018-title5/pdf/USCODE-
2018-title5-partI-chap5-subchapII-sec552a.pdf
[RFC5280] Cooper D, Santesson S, Farrell S, Boeyen S, Housley R, Polk W (2008) Internet 
X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certification and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile. 
(Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)), IETF Request for Comments (RFC) 5280. https:
//doi.org/10.17487/RFC5280
[RFC8446] Rescorla E (2018) The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.3. 
(Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)), IETF Request for Comments (RFC) 8446. https:
//doi.org/10.17487/RFC8446
[RFC9325] Sheffer Y, Saint-Andre P, Fossati T (2022) Recommendations for Secure Use of 
Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS). (Internet 
Engineering Task Force (IETF)), IETF Request for Comments (RFC) 9325. https://doi.org/
10.17487/RFC9325
[SP800-30] Blank R, Gallagher P (2012) Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments. (National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD) NIST Special Publication (SP) 
NIST SP 800-30r1. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-30r1
[SP800-52] McKay K, Cooper D (2019) Guidelines for the Selection, Configuration, and 
Use of Transport Layer Security (TLS) Implementations. (National Institute of Standards 
and Technology), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-52r2. https://doi.org/10.
6028/NIST.SP.800-52r2
[SP800-53] Joint Task Force (2020) Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems 
and Organizations. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), 
NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-53r5, Includes updates as of December 10, 
2020. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-53r5
[SP800-55V2] Schroeder K, Trinh H, Pillitteri V (2024) Measurement Guide for 
Information Security: Volume 2 — Developing an Information Security Measurement 
Program. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST 
Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-55 Vol. 2. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-55v2
55

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
[SP800-57Part1] Barker EB (2020) Recommendation for Key Management: Part 1 – 
General. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST 
Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-57pt1r5. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-
57pt1r5
[SP800-63A] Temoshok D, Abruzzi C, Choong YY, Fenton JL, Galluzzo R, LaSalle C, 
Lefkovitz N, Regenscheid A, Vachino M (2025) Digital Identity Guidelines: Identity 
Proofing and Enrollment. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, 
MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-63A-4. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.
800-63A-4
[SP800-63B] Temoshok D, Fenton JL, Choong YY, Lefkovitz N, Regenscheid A, Galluzzo 
R, Richer JP (2025) Digital Identity Guidelines: Authentication and Authenticator 
Management. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST 
Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-63B-4. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-63B-4
[SP800-63C] Temoshok D, Richer JP, Choong YY, Fenton JL, Lefkovitz N, Regenscheid 
A, Galluzzo R (2025) Digital Identity Guidelines: Federation and Assertions. (National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) 
NIST SP 800-63C-4. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-63C-4
[SP800-122] McCallister E, Grance T, Scarfone KA (2010) Guide to Protecting the 
Confidentiality of Personally Identifiable Information (PII). (National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-
122. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-122
56

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Appendix A.
List of Symbols, Abbreviations, and Acronyms
1:1 Comparison
One-to-One Comparison
AAL
Authentication Assurance Level
ABAC
Attribute-Based Access Control
API
Application Programming Interface
ASCII
American Standard Code for Information Interchange
CAC
Common Access Card
CN
Common Name
CSP
Credential Service Provider
CSRF
Cross-Site Request Forgery
DNS
Domain Name System
FACT Act
Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003
FAL
Federation Assurance Level
FEDRAMP
Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program
57

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
FIPS
Federal Information Processing Standards
FMR
False Match Rate
FNMR
False Non-Match Rate
IAL
Identity Assurance Level
IdP
Identity Provider
JWT
JSON Web Token
KBA
Knowledge-Based Authentication
KBV
Knowledge-Based Verification
KDC
Key Distribution Center
MAC
Message Authentication Code
MF
Multi-Factor
MFA
Multi-Factor Authentication
MNO
Mobile Network Operator
NARA
National Archives and Records Administration
58

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
OIDC
OpenID Connect
NFC (communications protocol)
Near-Field Communication
NFC (Unicode normalization algorithm)
Normalization Form Canonical Composition
OTP
One-Time Password
OWASP
Open Worldwide Application Security Project
PAD
Presentation Attack Detection
PIA
Privacy Impact Assessment
PIN
Personal Identification Number
PIV
Personal Identity Verification
PKI
Public-Key Infrastructure
PPI
Pairwise Pseudonymous Identifier
PSTN
Public Switched Telephone Network
QR
Quick Response
RMF
Risk Management Framework
59

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
RP
Relying Party
SA&A
Security Authorization & Accreditation
SAML
Security Assertion Markup Language
SAOP
Senior Agency Official for Privacy
SCIM
System for Cross-Domain Identity Management
SF
Single-Factor
SMS
Short Message Service
SORN
System of Records Notice
SSO
Single Sign-On
TEE
Trusted Execution Environment
TLS
Transport Layer Security
TPM
Trusted Platform Module
TTP
Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures
USB
Universal Serial Bus
60

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
VOIP
Voice-Over-IP
XSS
Cross-Site Scripting
61

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Appendix B.
Glossary
This section is informative.
A wide variety of terms are used in the realm of digital identity. While many definitions 
are consistent with earlier versions of SP 800-63, some have changed in this revision. 
Many of these terms lack a single, consistent definition, warranting careful attention to 
how the terms are defined here.
account linking
The association of multiple federated identifiers with a single RP subscriber account or 
the management of those associations.
account recovery
The ability to regain ownership of a subscriber account and its associated information 
and privileges.
account resolution
The association of an RP subscriber account with information that is already held by the 
RP prior to the federation transaction and outside of a trust agreement.
activation
The process of inputting an activation factor into a multi-factor authenticator to enable 
its use for authentication.
activation factor
An additional authentication factor that is used to enable successful authentication with 
a multi-factor authenticator.
activation secret
A password that is used locally as an activation factor for a multi-factor authenticator.
allowlist
A documented list of specific elements that are allowed, per policy decision. In 
federation contexts, this is most commonly used to refer to the list of RPs that are 
allowed to connect to an IdP without subscriber intervention. This concept has 
historically been known as a whitelist.
applicant
A subject undergoing the processes of identity proofing and enrollment.
62

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
applicant reference
A representative of the applicant who can vouch for the identity of the applicant, specific 
attributes related to the applicant, or conditions relative to the context of the individual 
(e.g., emergency status, homelessness).
approved cryptography
An encryption algorithm, hash function, random bit generator, or similar technique that 
is Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS)-approved or NIST-recommended. 
Approved algorithms and techniques are either specified or adopted in a FIPS or NIST 
recommendation.
assertion
A statement from an IdP to an RP that contains information about an authentication 
event for a subscriber. Assertions can also contain identity attributes for the subscriber 
in the form of attribute values, derived attribute values, and attribute bundles.
assertion injection attack
In the context of a federated protocol, consists of an attacker attempting to force an RP 
to accept or process an assertion or assertion reference in order to gain access to the 
RP or deny a legitimate subscriber access to the RP. The attacker does this by taking an 
assertion or assertion reference and injecting it into a vulnerable RP.
assertion reference
A data object that is created in conjunction with an assertion and used by the RP to 
retrieve an assertion over an authenticated protected channel.
assertion presentation
The method by which an assertion is transmitted to the RP.
asymmetric keys
Two related cryptographic keys comprised of a public key and a private key that are used 
to perform complementary operations, such as encryption and decryption or signature 
verification and generation.
attestation
Information conveyed to the CSP, generally at the time that an authenticator is bound, to 
describe the characteristics of a connected authenticator or the endpoint involved in an 
authentication operation.
63

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
attribute
A quality or characteristic ascribed to someone or something. An identity attribute is an 
attribute about the identity of a subscriber (e.g., name, date of birth, address).
attribute bundle
A package of attribute values and derived attribute values from a CSP. The package 
has the necessary cryptographic protection to allow for the validation of the bundle 
independent from interaction with the CSP or IdP. Attribute bundles are often used with 
subscriber-controlled wallets.
attribute provider
The provider of an identity API that provides access to a subscriber’s attributes without 
necessarily asserting that the subscriber is present to the RP.
attribute validation
The process or act of confirming that a set of attributes are accurate and associated with 
a real-life identity. See validation.
attribute value
A complete statement that asserts an identity attribute of a subscriber, independent 
of format. For example, for the attribute “birthday,” a value could be “12/1/1980” or 
“December 1, 1980.”
audience restriction
The restriction of a message to a specific target audience to prevent a receiver from 
unknowingly processing a message that is intended for another recipient. In federation 
protocols, assertions are audience-restricted to specific RPs to prevent an RP from 
accepting an assertion that was generated for a different RP.
authenticate
See authentication.
authenticated protected channel
An encrypted communication channel that uses approved cryptography in which the 
connection initiator (client) has authenticated the recipient (server). Authenticated 
protected channels are encrypted to provide confidentiality and protection against 
active intermediaries and are frequently used in the user authentication process. 
Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) [RFC9325] 
are examples of authenticated protected channels in which the certificate presented 
by the recipient is verified by the initiator. Unless otherwise specified, authenticated 
protected channels do not require the server to authenticate the client. Authentication 
of the server is often accomplished through a certificate chain that leads to a trusted 
root rather than individually with each server.
64

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
authenticated session
See protected session.
authentication
The process by which a claimant proves possession and control of one or more 
authenticators bound to a subscriber account to demonstrate that they are the 
subscriber associated with that account.
authentication assurance level (AAL)
A category that describes the strength of the authentication process.
authentication event
An attempt by a user to authenticate to an online service that ends in overall success or 
failure.
authentication factor
The three types of authentication factors are something you know, something you have, 
and something you are. Every authenticator has one or more authentication factors.
authentication intent
The process of confirming the claimant’s intent to authenticate or reauthenticate by 
requiring user intervention in the authentication flow. Some authenticators (e.g., OTPs) 
establish authentication intent as part of their operation. Others require a specific step 
to establish intent, such as pressing a button. Authentication intent is a countermeasure 
against malware at the endpoint as a proxy for authenticating an attacker without the 
subscriber’s knowledge.
authentication key
A private or symmetric key used by an authenticator to generate the authenticator 
output.
authentication protocol
A defined sequence of messages between a claimant and a verifier that demonstrates 
that the claimant has possession and control of one or more valid authenticators to 
establish their identity and, optionally, demonstrates that the claimant is communicating 
with the intended verifier.
authentication secret
A generic term for any secret value that is used to verify the subscriber in an 
authentication protocol. These are further divided into short-term authentication 
secrets, which are only useful to an attacker for a limited period of time, and long-term 
authentication secrets, which allow an attacker to impersonate the subscriber until 
65

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
they are manually reset. The authenticator secret is the canonical example of a long-
term authentication secret, while the authenticator output — if it is different from the 
authenticator secret — is usually a short-term authentication secret.
authenticator
Something that the subscriber possesses and controls (e.g., a cryptographic module or 
password) and that is used to authenticate a claimant’s identity. See authenticator type
and multi-factor authenticator.
authenticator binding
The establishment of an association between a specific authenticator and a subscriber 
account that allows the authenticator to authenticate the subscriber associated with the 
account, possibly in conjunction with other authenticators.
authenticator output
The output value generated by an authenticator. The ability to generate valid 
authenticator outputs on demand proves that the claimant possesses and controls 
the authenticator. Protocol messages sent to the verifier depend on the authenticator 
output, but they may or may not explicitly contain it.
authenticator type
A category of authenticators with common characteristics, such as the types of 
authentication factors they provide and the mechanisms by which they operate.
authenticity
The property that data originated from its purported source.
authoritative source
An entity that has access to or verified copies of accurate information from an issuing 
source such that a CSP has high confidence that the source can confirm the validity of 
the identity attributes or evidence supplied by an applicant during identity proofing. 
An issuing source may also be an authoritative source. Often, authoritative sources are 
determined by a policy decision of the agency or CSP before they can be used in the 
identity proofing validation phase.
authorize
A decision to grant access, typically automated by evaluating a subject’s attributes.
authorized party
In federation, the organization, person, or entity that is responsible for making decisions 
regarding the release of information within the federation transaction, most notably 
subscriber attributes. This is often the subscriber (when runtime decisions are used) or 
the party operating the IdP (when allowlists are used).
66

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
back-channel communication
Communication between two systems that relies on a direct connection without using 
redirects through an intermediary, such as a browser.
bearer assertion
An assertion that can be presented on its own as proof of the identity of the presenter.
biometric reference
One or more stored biometric samples, templates, or models attributed to an individual 
and used as the object of biometric comparison in a database, such as a facial image 
stored digitally on a passport, fingerprint minutiae template on a National ID card, or 
Gaussian Mixture Model for speaker recognition.
biometric sample
An analog or digital representation of biometric characteristics prior to biometric feature 
extraction, such as a record that contains a fingerprint image.
biometrics
Automated recognition of individuals based on their biological or behavioral 
characteristics. Biological characteristics include but are not limited to fingerprints, palm 
prints, facial features, iris and retina patterns, voice prints, and vein patterns. Behavioral 
characteristics include keystroke cadence, the angle of holding a smartphone, screen 
pressure, typing speed, mouse or mobile phone movements, and gyroscope position, 
among others.
blocklist
A documented list of specific elements that are blocked, per policy decision. This 
concept has historically been known as a “blacklist.”
bound authenticator
An authenticator verified by the RP in addition to an assertion at FAL3. The bound 
authenticator is bound to the RP subscriber account.
challenge-response protocol
An authentication protocol in which the verifier sends the claimant a challenge (e.g., 
a random value or nonce) that the claimant combines with a secret (e.g., by hashing 
the challenge and a shared secret together or by applying a private-key operation 
to the challenge) to generate a response that is sent to the verifier. The verifier can 
independently verify the response generated by the claimant (e.g., by recomputing 
the hash of the challenge and the shared secret and comparing it to the response or 
performing a public-key operation on the response) and establish that the claimant 
possesses and controls the secret.
67

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
claimant
A subject whose identity is to be verified using one or more authentication protocols.
claimed identity
An applicant’s declaration of unvalidated and unverified personal attributes.
compensating controls
Alternative controls to the normative controls for the assessed and selected xALs of an 
organization based on that organization’s mission, risk tolerance, business processes, risk 
assessments, and considerations for the privacy, usability, and customer experience of 
the populations served by the online service.
controls
Policies, procedures, guidelines, practices, or organizational structures that manage 
security, privacy, and other risks. See supplemental controls and compensating controls.
core attributes
The set of identity attributes that the CSP has determined and documented to be 
required for identity proofing and to provide services.
credential
An object or data structure that authoritatively binds an identity — via an identifier — 
and (optionally) additional attributes to at least one authenticator that is possessed and 
controlled by a subscriber. A credential is issued, stored, and maintained by the CSP. 
Copies of information from the credential can be possessed by the subscriber, typically in 
the form of one or more digital certificates that are often contained in an authenticator 
along with their associated private keys.
credential service provider (CSP)
A trusted entity whose functions include identity proofing applicants to the identity 
service and registering authenticators to subscriber accounts. A CSP may be an 
independent third party.
credible source
An entity that can provide or validate the accuracy of identity evidence and attribute
information. A credible source has access to attribute information that was validated 
through an identity proofing process or that can be traced to an authoritative source, 
or it maintains identity attribute information obtained from multiple sources that is 
checked for data correlation for accuracy, consistency, and currency.
68

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
cross-site request forgery (CSRF)
An attack in which a subscriber who is currently authenticated to an RP and connected 
through a secure session browses an attacker’s website, causing the subscriber to 
unknowingly invoke unwanted actions at the RP. For example, if a bank website is 
vulnerable to a CSRF attack, it may be possible for a subscriber to unintentionally 
authorize a large money transfer by clicking on a malicious link in an email while a 
connection to the bank is open in another browser window.
cross-site scripting (XSS)
A vulnerability that allows attackers to inject malicious code into an otherwise benign 
website. These scripts acquire the permissions of scripts that are generated by the target 
website to compromise the confidentiality and integrity of data transfers between the 
website and clients. Websites are vulnerable if they display user-supplied data from 
requests or forms without sanitizing the data so that it is not executable.
cryptographic authenticator
An authenticator that proves possession of an authentication secret through direct 
communication with a verifier through a cryptographic authentication protocol.
cryptographic key
A value used to control cryptographic operations, such as decryption, encryption, 
signature generation, or signature verification. For the purposes of these guidelines, 
key requirements shall meet the minimum requirements stated in Table 2 of 
[SP800-57Part1]. See asymmetric keys or symmetric keys.
cryptographic module
A set of hardware, software, or firmware that implements approved security functions, 
including cryptographic algorithms and key generation.
decryption key
The cryptographic key used to decrypt the encrypted payload. In asymmetric 
cryptography, the decryption key refers to the private key of the cryptographic key pair. 
In symmetric cryptography, the decryption key is the symmetric key.
derived attribute value
A statement that asserts a limited identity attribute of a subscriber without containing 
the attribute value from which it is derived, independent of format. For example, instead 
of requesting the attribute “birthday,” a derived value could be “older than 18.” Instead 
of requesting the attribute for “physical address,” a derived value could be “currently 
residing in this district.” Previous versions of these guidelines referred to this construct 
as an “attribute reference.”
69

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
digital authentication
The process of establishing confidence in user identities that are digitally presented 
to a system. In previous editions of SP 800-63, this was referred to as “electronic 
authentication.”
digital identity
An attribute or set of attributes that uniquely describes a subject within a given context.
Digital Identity Acceptance Statement (DIAS)
Documents the results of the digital identity risk management process. This includes the 
impact assessment, initial assurance level selection, and tailoring process.
digital signature
An asymmetric key operation in which the private key is used to digitally sign data, and 
the public key is used to verify the signature. Digital signatures provide authenticity
protection, integrity protection, and non-repudiation support but not confidentiality or 
replay attack protection.
digital transaction
A discrete digital event between a user and a system that supports a business or 
programmatic purpose.
disassociability
Enabling the processing of personal information or events without association to 
individuals or devices beyond the operational requirements of the system. [NISTIR8062]
encryption key
The cryptographic key used to encrypt a payload. In asymmetric cryptography, the 
encryption key refers to the public key of the cryptographic key pair. In symmetric 
cryptography, the encryption key is the symmetric key.
endpoint
Any device that is used to access a digital identity on a network, such as laptops, 
desktops, mobile phones, tablets, servers, Internet of Things devices, and virtual 
environments.
enrollment
The process through which a CSP/IdP provides a successfully identity-proofed applicant
with a subscriber account and binds authenticators to grant persistent access.
70

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
entropy
The amount of uncertainty that an attacker faces to determine the value of a secret. 
Entropy is usually stated in bits. A value with n bits of entropy has the same degree of 
uncertainty as a uniformly distributed n-bit random value.
factor
See authentication factor.
Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS)
Standards for adoption and use by federal departments and agencies that are developed 
by NIST, a part of the U.S. Department of Commerce. FIPS address topics in information 
technology to achieve common levels of quality, security, and interoperability. FIPS 
documents are available online on the FIPS home page: https://www.nist.gov/itl/fips.
cfm.
federated identifier
The combination of a subject identifier within an assertion and an identifier for the 
IdP that issued that assertion. When combined, these pieces of information uniquely 
identify the subscriber in the context of a federation transaction.
federation
A process that allows for the conveyance of identity and authentication information 
across a set of networked systems.
federation assurance level (FAL)
A category that describes the process used in a federation transaction to communicate 
authentication events and subscriber attributes to an RP.
federation authority
A party that facilitates the establishment and management of one or more trust 
agreements between federated parties. The federation authority can also provide 
other services, such as a federation proxy, discovery and registration support, and 
conformance evaluation.
federation protocol
A technical protocol that is used in a federation transaction between networked systems.
federation proxy
A component that acts as a logical RP to a set of IdPs and a logical IdP to a set of RPs, 
bridging the two systems with a single component. These are sometimes referred to as 
“brokers.”
71

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
federation transaction
A specific instance of processing an authentication using a federation process for a 
specific subscriber by conveying an assertion from an IdP to an RP.
front-channel communication
Communication between two systems that relies on passing messages through an 
intermediary, such as using redirects through the subscriber’s browser.
general-purpose IdP
An IdP that is housed and executed separately from a subscriber’s device (e.g., a 
remote service). Often, a general-purpose IdP will be capable of representing multiple 
subscribers.
hash function
A function that maps a bit string of arbitrary length to a fixed-length bit string. Approved 
hash functions satisfy the following properties:
1. One-way — It is computationally infeasible to find any input that maps to any pre-
specified output.
2. Collision-resistant — It is computationally infeasible to find any two distinct inputs 
that map to the same output.
identifier
A data object that is associated with a single, unique entity (e.g., individual, device, or 
session) within a given context and is never assigned to any other entity within that 
context.
identity
See digital identity.
identity API
A protected API that is accessed by an RP to retrieve the attributes of a specific 
subscriber.
identity assurance level (IAL)
A category that conveys the degree of confidence that the subject’s claimed identity is 
their real identity.
identity evidence
Information or documentation that supports the real-world existence of the claimed 
identity. Identity evidence may be physical (e.g., a driver’s license) or digital (e.g., a 
mobile driver’s license or digital assertion). Evidence must support both validation (i.e., 
72

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
confirming authenticity and accuracy) and verification (i.e., confirming that the applicant
is the true owner of the evidence).
identity proofing
The processes used to collect, validate, and verify information about a subject to 
establish assurance in the subject’s claimed identity.
identity provider (IdP)
The party in a federation transaction that creates an assertion for the subscriber and 
transmits the assertion to the RP.
identity resolution
The process of collecting information about an applicant to uniquely distinguish an 
individual within the context of the population that the CSP serves.
identity verification
See verification.
injection attack
An attack in which an attacker supplies untrusted biometric information or media into a 
program or process. For example, this could include injecting a falsified image of identity 
evidence, a forged video of a user, or a morphed image to defeat evidence validation 
technology or biometric and visual comparisons for user verification.
issuing source
An authority responsible for the generation of data, digital evidence (i.e., assertions), or 
physical documents that can be used as identity evidence.
knowledge-based verification (KBV)
A process of validating the knowledge of personal or private information associated with 
an individual for the purpose of verifying the claimed identity of an applicant. KBV does 
not include collecting personal attributes for the purposes of identity resolution.
login
The establishment of an authenticated session between a person and a system. Also 
known as “sign in,” “log on,” or “sign on.”
manageability
Providing the capability for the granular administration of personal information, 
including alteration, deletion, and selective disclosure. [NISTIR8062]
73

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
memorized secret
See password.
message authentication code (MAC)
A cryptographic checksum on data that uses a symmetric key to detect both accidental 
and intentional modifications of the data. MACs provide authenticity and integrity 
protection but not non-repudiation protection.
mobile code
Executable code that is normally transferred from its source to another computer system 
for execution. This transfer is often through the network (e.g., JavaScript embedded in a 
web page) but may transfer through physical media as well.
multi-factor authentication (MFA)
An authentication system that requires more than one distinct type of authentication 
factor for successful authentication. MFA can be performed using a multi-factor 
authenticator or by combining single-factor authenticators that provide different types 
of factors.
multi-factor authenticator
An authenticator that provides more than one distinct authentication factor, such as a 
cryptographic authentication device with an integrated biometric sensor that is required 
to activate the device.
natural person
A real-life human being, not synthetic or artificial.
network
An open communications medium, typically the internet, used to transport messages 
between the claimant and other parties. Unless otherwise stated, networks are assumed 
to be open and subject to active (e.g., impersonation, session hijacking) and passive (e.g., 
eavesdropping) attacks at any point between the parties (e.g., claimant, verifier, CSP, 
RP).
nonce
A value used in security protocols that is never repeated with the same key. For example, 
nonces used as challenges in challenge-response authentication protocols must not be 
repeated until authentication keys are changed. Otherwise, there is a possibility of a 
replay attack. Using a nonce as a challenge is a different requirement than a random 
challenge because a nonce is not necessarily unpredictable.
74

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
non-repudiation
The capability to protect against an individual falsely denying having performed a 
particular transaction.
offline attack
An attack in which the attacker obtains some data (e.g., by eavesdropping on an 
authentication transaction or by penetrating a system and stealing security files) that 
the attacker is able to analyze in a system of their own choosing.
one-to-one (1:1) comparison
The process in which a biometric sample from an individual is compared to a biometric 
reference to produce a comparison score.
online attack
An attack against an authentication protocol in which the attacker either assumes the 
role of a claimant with a genuine verifier or actively alters the authentication channel.
online guessing attack
An attack in which an attacker performs repeated logon trials by guessing possible values 
of the authenticator output.
online service
A service that is accessed remotely via a network, typically the internet.
pairwise pseudonymous identifier
A pseudonymous identifier generated by an IdP for use at a specific RP.
passphrase
A password that consists of a sequence of words or other text that a claimant uses to 
authenticate their identity. A passphrase is similar to a password in usage but is generally 
longer for added security.
password
A type of authenticator consisting of a character string that is intended to be memorized 
or memorable by the subscriber to permit the claimant to demonstrate something they 
know as part of an authentication process. Passwords were referred to as memorized 
secrets in the initial release of SP 800-63B.
personal identification number (PIN)
A password that typically consists of only decimal digits.
75

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
personal information
Information that can be used to distinguish or trace an individual’s identity, either 
alone or when combined with other information that is linked or linkable to a specific 
individual.
pharming
An attack in which an attacker causes the subscriber to be redirected to a fraudulent 
website, typically a fraudulent verifier/RP in the context of authentication. This could 
cause the subscriber to reveal sensitive information (e.g., a password) to the attacker, 
download harmful software, or contribute to a fraudulent act. This may be accomplished 
by corrupting an infrastructure service (e.g., the DNS) or the subscriber’s endpoint.
phishing
An attack in which the subscriber is lured (usually through an email) to interact with 
a counterfeit verifier/RP and tricked into revealing information that can be used to 
masquerade as that subscriber to the real verifier/RP.
phishing resistance
The ability of the authentication protocol to prevent the disclosure of authentication 
secrets and valid authenticator outputs to an impostor verifier without reliance on the 
vigilance of the claimant.
physical authenticator
An authenticator that the claimant proves possession of as part of an authentication 
process.
possession and control of an authenticator
The ability to activate and use the authenticator in an authentication protocol.
practice statement
A formal statement of the practices followed by parties in an authentication process 
(e.g., CSP or verifier). It usually describes the parties’ policies and practices and can 
become legally binding.
predictability
Enabling reliable assumptions by individuals, owners, and operators about personal 
information and its processing by an information system. [NISTIR8062]
presentation attack
Presentation to the biometric data capture subsystem with the goal of interfering with 
the operation of the biometric system.
76

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
presentation attack detection (PAD)
Automated determination of a presentation attack. A subset of presentation attack 
determination methods (i.e., liveness detection) involves the measurement and analysis 
of anatomical characteristics or voluntary or involuntary reactions to determine whether 
a biometric sample is being captured from a living subject that is present at the point of 
capture.
Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA)
A method of analyzing how personal information is collected, used, shared, and 
maintained. PIAs are used to identify and mitigate privacy risks throughout the 
development life cycle of a program or system. They also help ensure that handling 
information conforms to legal, regulatory, and policy requirements regarding privacy.
private key
A cryptographic key used with a public-key cryptographic algorithm that is uniquely 
associated with an entity and is not made public. In an asymmetric-key (public-key) 
cryptosystem, the private key has a corresponding public key. Depending on the 
algorithm, the private key may be used to:
1. Compute the corresponding public key,
2. Compute a digital signature that may be verified by the corresponding public key,
3. Decrypt keys that were encrypted by the corresponding public key, or
4. Compute a shared secret during a key-agreement transaction.
problematic data action
A data action that could cause an adverse effect for individuals.
process assistant
An individual who provides support for the proofing process but does not support 
decision-making or risk-based evaluation (e.g., translation, transcription, or accessibility 
support).
processing
An operation or set of operations performed on personal information that can include, 
but is not limited to, the collection, retention, logging, generation, transformation, use, 
disclosure, transfer, or disposal of personal information. [NISTIR8062]
proofing agent
An agent of the CSP who is trained to attend identity proofing sessions and can make 
limited risk-based decisions, such as physically inspecting identity evidence and 
comparing the applicant to the identity evidence.
77

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
protected session
A session in which messages between two participants are encrypted and integrity is 
protected using a set of shared secrets called “session keys.” A protected session is said 
to be authenticated if one participant proves possession of one or more authenticators
in addition to the session keys and if the other party can verify the identity associated 
with the authenticators during the session. If both participants are authenticated, the 
protected session is said to be mutually authenticated.
provisioning API
A protected API that allows an RP to access identity attributes for multiple subscribers for 
the purposes of provisioning and managing RP subscriber accounts.
pseudonym
A name other than a legal name.
pseudonymity
The use of a pseudonym to identify a subject.
pseudonymous identifier
A meaningless but unique identifier that does not allow the RP to infer anything 
regarding the subscriber but that does permit the RP to associate multiple interactions 
with a single subscriber.
public key
A cryptographic key used with a public-key cryptographic algorithm that is uniquely 
associated with an entity and that may be made public. In an asymmetric-key (public-
key) cryptosystem, the public key has a corresponding private key. The public key may be 
known by anyone and, depending on the algorithm, may be used to:
1. Verify a digital signature that was generated using the corresponding private key,
2. Encrypt keys that can be decrypted using the corresponding private key, or
3. Compute a shared secret during a key-agreement transaction.
public-key certificate
A digital document issued and digitally signed by the private key of a certificate authority 
that binds an identifier to a subscriber’s public key. The certificate indicates that the 
subscriber identified in the certificate has sole control of and access to the private key. 
See also [RFC5280].
public-key infrastructure (PKI)
A set of policies, processes, server platforms, software, and workstations used to 
administer certificates and public-private key pairs, including the ability to issue, 
maintain, and revoke public-key certificates.
78

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
reauthentication
The process of confirming the subscriber’s continued presence and intent to be 
authenticated during an extended usage session.
registration
See enrollment.
relying party (RP)
An entity that relies on a verifier’s assertion of a subscriber’s identity, typically to process 
a transaction or grant access to information or a system.
remote
A process or transaction that is conducted through connected devices over a network
rather than in person.
replay attack
An attack in which the attacker is able to replay previously captured messages between 
a legitimate claimant and a verifier to masquerade as that claimant to the verifier or vice 
versa.
replay resistance
The property of an authentication process to resist replay attacks, typically by the use of 
an authenticator output that is only valid for a specific authentication.
resolution
See identity resolution.
restricted authenticator
An authenticator type, class, or instantiation that has additional risk of false acceptance 
associated with its use and is therefore subject to additional requirements.
risk assessment
The process of identifying, estimating, and prioritizing risks to organizational operations 
(i.e., mission, functions, image, reputation), organizational assets, individuals, and other 
organizations that result from the operation of a system. A risk assessment is part of risk 
management, incorporates threat and vulnerability analyses, and considers mitigations 
provided by security controls that are planned or in place. It is synonymous with “risk 
analysis.”
risk management
The program and supporting processes that manage information security risk to 
organizational operations (i.e., mission, functions, image, reputation), organizational 
79

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
assets, individuals, and other organizations and that include (i) establishing the context 
for risk-related activities, (ii) assessing risk, (iii) responding to risk once determined, and 
(iv) monitoring risk over time.
RP subscriber account
An account established and managed by the RP in a federated system based on the RP’s 
view of the subscriber account from the IdP. An RP subscriber account is associated 
with one or more federated identifiers and allows the subscriber to access the account 
through a federation transaction with the IdP.
salt
A non-secret value used in a cryptographic process, usually to ensure that the results of 
computations for one instance cannot be reused by an attacker.
security domain
A set of systems under common administrative and access control.
Senior Agency Official for Privacy (SAOP)
Person responsible for ensuring that an agency complies with privacy requirements, 
manages privacy risks, and considers the privacy impacts of all agency actions and 
policies that involve personal information.
session
A persistent interaction between a subscriber and an endpoint, either an RP or a CSP. A 
session begins with an authentication event and ends with a session termination event. 
A session is bound by the use of a session secret that the subscriber’s software (e.g., 
browser, application, OS) can present to the RP to prove association of the session with 
the authentication event.
session hijack attack
An attack in which the attacker is able to insert themselves between a claimant and a 
verifier after a successful authentication exchange between the latter two parties. The 
attacker is able to pose as a subscriber to the verifier or vice versa to control session data 
exchange. Sessions between the claimant and the RP can be similarly compromised.
shared secret
A secret used in authentication that is known to the subscriber and the verifier.
side-channel attack
An attack enabled by the leakage of information from a physical cryptosystem. 
Characteristics that could be exploited in a side-channel attack include timing, power 
consumption, electromagnetic emissions, and acoustic emissions.
80

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
signing key
The cryptographic key used to create a signature. In asymmetric cryptography, the 
signing key refers to the private key of the cryptographic key pair. In symmetric 
cryptography, the signing key is the symmetric key.
single-factor
A characteristic of an authentication system or an authenticator that requires only one 
authentication factor (i.e., something you know, something you have, or something you 
are) for successful authentication.
single sign-on (SSO)
An authentication process by which one account and its authenticators are used to 
access multiple applications in a seamless manner, generally implemented with a 
federation protocol.
social engineering
The act of deceiving an individual into revealing sensitive information, obtaining 
unauthorized access, or committing fraud by associating with the individual to gain 
confidence and trust.
subject
A person, organization, device, hardware, network, software, or service. In these 
guidelines, a subject is a natural person.
subscriber
An individual enrolled in the CSP identity service.
subscriber account
An account established by the CSP for each subscriber enrolled in its identity service that 
contains information about the subscriber and a record of any authenticators registered 
to the subscriber.
subscriber-controlled wallet
A type of IdP that is issued attribute bundles by the CSP. The subscriber-controlled wallet 
that is either housed on a subscriber-controlled device (sometimes known as a digital 
wallet) or as a remote service (sometimes known as a cloud wallet).
supplemental controls
Controls that may be added to address specific threats or attacks in addition to those 
controls specified in the assurance levels in these guidelines.
81

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
symmetric key
A cryptographic key used to perform both the cryptographic operation and its inverse 
(e.g., to encrypt and decrypt or to create a message authentication code and verify the 
code).
sync fabric
Any on-premises, cloud-based, or hybrid service used to store, transmit, or manage 
authentication keys generated by syncable authenticators that are not local to the user’s 
device.
syncable authenticators
Software or hardware cryptographic authenticators that allow authentication keys to be 
cloned and exported to other storage to sync those keys to other authenticators (i.e., 
devices).
synthetic identity fraud
The use of a combination of personal information to fabricate a person or entity to 
commit a dishonest act for personal or financial gain.
system of record (SOR)
A collection of records that contain information about individuals and are under 
the control of an agency. The records can be retrieved by the individual’s name, an 
identifying number, a symbol, or other identifier.
System of Records Notice (SORN)
A notice that federal agencies publish in the Federal Register to describe their system of 
record.
tailoring
The process by which xALs and specified controls are modified by considering impacts on 
privacy, usability, and customer experience of the user population; considering specific 
threats to the organization; identifying and designating common controls; scoping 
considerations on the applicability and implementation of specified controls; selecting 
any compensating controls; assigning specific values to organization-defined security 
control parameters; supplementing xAL controls with additional controls or control 
enhancements; and specifying additional information for control implementation.
technical profile
A fully conformant subset of functionality of a protocol or standard. Technical profiles 
are used to enhance interoperability.
82

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
token
See authenticator.
transaction
See digital transaction.
Transport Layer Security (TLS)
An authentication and security protocol that is widely implemented in browsers and web 
servers. TLS provides confidentiality, certificate-based authentication of the receiving 
(server) endpoint, and certificate-based authentication of the originating (client) 
endpoint. TLS is specified in [RFC8446] and [SP800-52].
trust agreement
A set of conditions under which a CSP, IdP, and RP are allowed to participate in a 
federation transaction to establish an authentication session between the subscriber
and the RP.
trust anchor
A public or symmetric key that is trusted because it is built directly into hardware 
or software or securely provisioned via out-of-band means rather than because it is 
vouched for by another trusted entity (e.g., in a public-key certificate). A trust anchor 
may have name or policy constraints that limit its scope.
trusted referee
An agent of the CSP who is trained to make risk-based decisions regarding an applicant’s
identity proofing case when that applicant is unable to meet the expected requirements 
of a defined IAL proofing process.
usability
The extent to which a product can be used by specified users to achieve specified 
goals with effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction in a specified context of use. 
[ISO/IEC9241-11]
validation
The process or act of checking and confirming that the evidence and attributes supplied 
by an applicant are authentic, accurate, and associated with a real-life identity. See 
attribute validation.
verification
The process or act of confirming that the applicant undergoing identity proofing holds 
the claimed real-life identity represented by the validated identity attributes and 
associated evidence. Synonymous with identity verification.
83

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
verification key
The cryptographic key used to verify a signature. In asymmetric cryptography, the 
verification key refers to the public key of the cryptographic key pair. In symmetric 
cryptography, the verification key is the symmetric key.
verifier
An entity that confirms the claimant’s identity by verifying the claimant’s possession and 
control of one or more authenticators using an authentication protocol. To do this, the 
verifier needs to confirm the binding of the authenticators with the subscriber account
and check that the subscriber account is active.
verifier impersonation
See phishing.
84

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
Appendix C.
Change Log
C.1.
SP 800-63-1
SP 800-63-1 updated NIST SP 800-63 to reflect current authenticator (then referred to as 
“token”) technologies and restructured it to provide a better understanding of the digital 
identity architectural model used here. Additional (minimum) technical requirements 
were specified for the CSP, protocols used to transport authentication information, and 
assertions if implemented within the digital identity model.
C.2.
SP 800-63-2
SP 800-63-2 was a limited update of SP 800-63-1 and substantive changes were only 
made in Sec. 5, Registration and Issuance Processes. The significant changes were 
intended to facilitate the use of professional credentials in the identity proofing process 
and to reduce the need to send postal mail to an address of record to issue credentials 
for level 3 remote registration. Other changes to Sec. 5 were minor explanations and 
clarifications.
C.3.
SP 800-63-3
SP 800-63-3 was a substantially updated and restructured SP 800-63-2. It introduces 
individual components of digital authentication assurance (i.e., AAL, IAL, and FAL) 
to support the growing need for independent treatment of authentication strength 
and confidence in an individual’s claimed identity (e.g., in strong pseudonymous 
authentication). A risk assessment methodology and its application to IAL, AAL, and 
FAL were included in this guideline. It also moved the whole of digital identity guidance 
covered under SP 800-63 from a single document describing authentication to a suite of 
four documents (to separately address the individual components mentioned above) of 
which SP 800-63-3 is the top-level document.
Other areas updated in SP 800-63-3 included:
• Renamed to Digital Identity Guidelines to properly represent that the scope 
includes identity proofing and federation and to support expanding the scope to 
include device identity or machine-to-machine authentication in future revisions
• Changed terminology, including the use of authenticator in place of token to avoid 
conflicting use of the word token in assertion technologies
• Updated authentication and assertion requirements to reflect advances in both 
security technology and threats
• Added requirements on the storage of long-term secrets by verifiers.
• Restructured identity proofing model
• Updated requirements regarding remote identity proofing
85

NIST SP 800-63-4
July 2025
Digital Identity Guidelines
• Clarified the use of independent channels and devices as “something you have”
• Removed pre-registered knowledge tokens (authenticators) with the recognition 
that they are special cases of (often very weak) passwords
• Added requirements regarding account recovery in the event of loss or theft of an 
authenticator
• Removed email as a valid channel for out-of-band authenticators
• Expanded the discussion of reauthentication and session management
• Expanded the discussion of identity federation and restructured assertions in the 
context of federation
C.4.
SP 800-63-4
SP 800-63-4 substantially updates and reorganizes SP 800-63-3 including:
• Expanded security, privacy, and customer experience considerations
• Updated digital identity models and the addition of a user-controlled wallet 
federation model that addresses the increased attention and adoption of digital 
wallets and attribute bundles
• Expanded digital identity risk management process that now defines protected 
online services, user groups, and impacted entities.
• A more descriptive introduction to establish the context of the DIRM process, the 
two dimensions of risk that it addresses, and its intended outcomes, including 
defining and understanding the online service that the organization is offering and 
intending to protect with identity systems
• Updated digital identity risk management process that allows for additional 
assessments to tailor initial baseline control selections
• Added performance metrics for the continuous evaluation of digital identity 
systems
• A new subsection on redress processes and requirements
• A new subsection to address the use of AI and ML in digital identity services
86
