UK digital verification services trust framework - GOV.UK
Cookies on GOV.UK
We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.
You have accepted additional cookies.
You can
change your cookie settings
at any time.
You have rejected additional cookies.
You can
change your cookie settings
at any time.
Accept additional cookies
Reject additional cookies
View cookies
Hide cookie message
Skip to main content
Collection
UK digital verification services trust framework
The most recent standards for digital verification services, with a record of previous versions.
Updates to this page
From:
Office for Digital Identities and Attributes
and
Department for Science, Innovation and Technology
Published:
13 September 2024
Last updated:
11 June 2026
Show all updates
11 June 2026
amended to rectify errors regarding which versions are currently certifiable.
9 June 2026
The collection has been updated to reflect which versions of the trust framework are now current and which have expired.
6 March 2026
Amended link to the trust framework pre-release.
13 September 2024
First published.
Get emails about this page
The UK digital verification services trust framework is the set of rules and standards that show what a good digital identity looks like.
Digital verification services can be independently certified against at least one of the current versions of the trust framework.
The most recent 1.0 publication is titled the UK digital verification services trust framework. Prior versions were titled the UK digital identity and attributes trust framework.
UK digital verification services trust framework – current versions
These are the current versions of the UK digital verification services trust framework.
Digital verification service providers should read section 0 of the most recent publication to understand which versions they can certify against.
UK digital verification services trust framework (1.0)
9 June 2026
Guidance
UK digital identity and attributes trust framework (0.4)
9 June 2026
Guidance
UK digital verification services trust framework – previous versions
Previous versions of the UK digital verification services trust framework, which services can no longer be certified against.
UK digital identity and attributes trust framework - beta version
20 July 2023
Guidance
UK digital identity and attributes trust framework alpha v2 (0.2)
26 January 2023
Guidance
UK digital identity and attributes trust framework alpha v1 (0.1)
11 January 2023
Guidance
Contents
Is this page useful?
Maybe
Yes
this page is useful
No
this page is not useful
Thank you for your feedback
Report a problem with this page
Help us improve GOV.UK
Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.
This field is for robots only. Please leave blank
What were you doing?
What went wrong?
Send
Cancel
Help us improve GOV.UK
To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab
and requires JavaScript
)
.
Cancel