TechDispatch
Digital identity wallets
The path towards a data protection by design and by default appoach
DIGITAL IDENTITY WALLETS
DIGITAL IDENTITY WALLETS
The path towards a data protection by design
and by default approach

We would like to thank Dr. Jaap-Henk Hoepman for his review of an advanced draft of the document 
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2025
© European Union, 2025
The Commission’s reuse policy is implemented under Commission Decision 2011/833/EU of 12 
December 2011 on the reuse of Commission documents (OJ L 330, 14.12.2011, p. 39, ELI: http://data.
europa.eu/eli/dec/2011/833/oj).
Unless otherwise noted, the reuse of this document is authorised under the Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). This 
means that reuse is allowed, provided appropriate credit is given and any changes are indicated.
PDF	
ISBN 978-92-9242-962-1	
ISSN 2599-932X	
doi:10.2804/8927807	
QT-01-25-007-EN-N

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
1
CONTENTS
Executive Summary...........................................................................................................2
1.	 Introduction.................................................................................................................4
1.1	 What is a digital identity?............................................................................................4
1.2	 The digital identity wallet concept..............................................................................4
1.3	 Purpose and scope of this TechDispatch.....................................................................5
2.	 Digital identity management ecosystem and models and relevant privacy issues.......6
2.1	 Actors of the identity management ecosystem and terminology used......................6
2.2	 	 Digital identity models...............................................................................................7
3.	 The Digital Identity Wallet: uses cases and features..................................................11
3.1	 How a Digital Identity Wallet materialises in practice...............................................11
3.2	 The Digital Identity Wallet use cases for identification, authorisation and digital 
signatures...................................................................................................................12
3.3	 Potential advantages of well-designed Digital Identity Wallets...............................13
3.4	 Currently deployed technology frameworks for (verifiable) credentials..................14
4.	 Data protection requirements and risks....................................................................15
4.1	 Risk to integrity and confidentiality of the Digital Identity Wallet............................15
4.2	 Risk of over-disclosure towards relying parties.........................................................16
4.3	 Risk of linkability of transactions, enabling tracking and profiling............................17
5.	 Mitigating measures for the selected data protection risks......................................19
5.1	 Ensuring integrity and confidentiality........................................................................19
5.2	 Selective disclosure and unlinkability: the case for anonymous credentials.............20
6.	 The EU Digital Identity Wallet...................................................................................25
6.1	 The EU Digital Identity Framework and Wallet.........................................................25
6.2	 EUDIW wallet ecosystem and features.....................................................................26
6.3	 The EUDIW and personal data protection requirements in the eIDAS Regulation..27
6.4	 Measures to implement data protection requirements in the EUDIW.....................28
7.	 Conclusion.................................................................................................................31
8.	 APPENDIX.................................................................................................................32
8.1	 Specific EUDIW data protection requirements.........................................................32
8.2	 Main references.........................................................................................................34
Endnotes.........................................................................................................................35

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
2
Executive Summary
The idea behind a Digital Identity Wallet (DIW) is to provide users with an easy way to store 
their identity data and credentials in a digital repository. This enables them to access services 
in both the physical and digital worlds while ensuring accountability for transactions.
The purpose of this TechDispatch is to introduce the concept of a DIW, understand the privacy 
risks that exist when using a DIW, and discuss relevant data protection by design and by default 
requirements and their implementation, including relevant technologies. Eventually, we assess 
how the European Digital Identity Wallet (EUDIW), mandated by the eIDAS 2 Regulation, fits 
within the framework outlined.
In general, we can identify four main actors within an identity management ecosystem: the 
users of a DIW, identity and attribute providers (IdPs), relying parties (RPs) and the scheme 
authority. Depending on the governance schema, other actors can also play a role. Various 
digital identity models have been developed over time and are currently in use. These include 
the isolated model, the centralised model, the federated model and the decentralised model, 
depending on the architecture of the schema and on the role of the IdP. We describe these 
models and assess their respective pros and cons in Chapter 2.
In a user-centric identity paradigm, where credentials are stored under the user’s control, such 
as with a DIW, there is no need for the RP to access the IdP to verify the user’s credentials with 
each request. This mitigates the risk that an IdP profiles users by observing and linking their 
transactions with different RPs.
DIW solutions are typically implemented through a combination of mobile applications and 
cloud infrastructure, and can be used for identification and authorisation, as well as for issuing 
and using digital signatures. These solutions use digital credentials constructed and protected 
by cryptographic techniques, called ‘verifiable credentials’. Well-designed DIWs can provide 
easy access to public and private services, and enhance users’ control and privacy, convenience, 
interoperability and data security. This document identifies DIW functionalities and currently 
most-commonly deployed solutions to implement verifiable credentials in Chapter 3.
Unauthorised access to a user’s DIW could reveal personal data, including sensitive information. 
Access to a user’s transactions, along with the ability to link them, would allow a party to create 
a profile of the user. The unfair and unlawful exploitation of user profiles could have prejudicial 
consequences for DIW users, including serious ones. This document mainly addresses DIW 
design choices that can mitigate these risks, focusing on the principles of data protection by 
design and by default. It is limited to risks relating to the integrity and confidentiality of the 
DIW, the risk of over-disclosure to relying parties, and the risk of linkability of DIW transactions, 
which could enable tracking and profiling. These risks and the relevant data protection 
requirements are described in Chapter 4.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
3
Chapter 5 of the document then sets out measures to mitigate these three main risks. To 
mitigate risks to integrity and confidentiality, it refers to secure elements (SEs), which provide 
a physically separate secure environment, as well as to platform-specific trusted execution 
environments (TEEs), which are used to isolate cryptographic operations and store sensitive 
data. To mitigate the risks of over-disclosure and linkability, the document introduces the 
anonymous credential technology, which enables authentication without identification in 
cases where identification is not strictly necessary. Although anonymous credentials are not 
a new concept, they have not yet been widely adopted. There are challenges to their use, yet 
new developments are emerging.
Finally, Chapter 6 is dedicated to the amended eIDAS Regulation. This Regulation provides 
for an EU-wide digital identity framework setting out rules for Member States to offer EUDIWs 
by the end of 2026. This document outlines the EUDIW and its features within the broader 
context of DIWs as described in previous chapters, and evaluates its potential to mitigate the 
aforementioned data protection risks.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
4
1.	 Introduction
1.1	
What is a digital identity?
In the past, if we had to file our tax return using non-digital means we would have had to visit 
the competent tax office and present our ID card or an equivalent identification document. 
Similarly, if we wanted to borrow an age-restricted publication from a library, we would have 
had to go to the library and again show our ID card to prove that we were old enough to 
borrow it.
Our daily lives are increasingly supported and shaped by the availability of the internet and 
of digital tools and resources. Mobile devices provide ubiquitous access to these resources. 
Nowadays it is possible to fill in and submit our tax return, or order and receive an age-
restricted publication from the comfort of a beach or a sofa at home. In addition to an internet 
connection, these services require a digital method of proving our identity to the tax office and 
demonstrating authorisation to the library.
Therefore, we can think of our digital identity as a digitised version of our physical identity 
documents and other credentials. More broadly, we can think of our digital identity as the 
entire collection of our digital interactions. It includes any use of our connected devices, our 
browsing history and preferences, our presence on social networks, our digital payments etc.
If someone with no need to know had access to this broader representation of our digital 
identity, they would be able to learn and further infer ‘who we are’, with all the consequences 
and risks that this entails, which are recalled later in Chapter 4.
More specifically, the most common use of the term ‘digital identity’ refers to a collection 
of pieces of information about a person that facilitates interactions in the digital realm. We 
can refer to these pieces of information, usually called ‘attributes’, and present ‘claims’ about 
them (to access a resource or for an entity to verify our identity and status) in a trustworthy way 
and in a machine-readable and verifiable format. These claims take the form of ‘credentials’. 
The attributes are individual data fields within those credentials. These credentials, when 
constructed and protected by cryptographic techniques, have been often referred to as 
‘attribute-based credentials’ and more generally as ‘verifiable credentials’1. In the following 
sections, we will use the simple term ‘credentials’ as a synonym for ‘verifiable credentials’a.
1.2	
The digital identity wallet concept
The idea behind the Digital Identity Wallet (DIW) concept is to create a digital repository for 
our identity data and credentials. This would work in a similar and analogous way to how we 
a	
In literature the term ‘verifiable credentials’ is also used to specifically refer to an existing W3C standard for a 
verifiable credentials data model. This can create confusion between the generic and the specific meaning but 
it is often possible to distinguish between the two based on context.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
5
keep our physical ID cards, passports, driving licenses, or other cards and documents that 
enable us to access services (such as healthcare or car rentals) in a physical wallet. These 
identity data and credentials are personal data, as they relate to an identifiable natural person.
Often our personal data and credentials are scattered across different digital platforms, mostly 
under their control and managed with varying levels of trust and security. The DIW plans to 
bring our credentials and other personal data into one ‘place’ to manage them conveniently, 
securely and, as far as possible, under our control.
In principle, a DIW may go beyond identity information. Depending on the information the user 
wishes to share through the DIW, it may also become a repository for all kinds of digital files 
and information that support our daily activities: from professional or education certificates to 
home utility contracts and bills; from a certificate of ownership of a house to a library card or 
a gym membership card; from a supermarket loyalty card to a leisure activity ticket. It could 
also act as a traditional wallet, holding and managing digital currency. We can think of this 
extended DIW concept as what is usually called a Personal Information Management System 
(PIMS)2, storing and managing any kind of personal data.
One notable and influential DIW project is the European Digital Identity Wallet (EUDIW), an 
EU initiative that provides for cross-border interoperable digital identity solutions within EU 
countries. Electronic identification solutions already exist or are being developed and integrated 
with the management of other documents and credentials, and are being harmonised as 
a EUDIW3. Many DIW solutions also exist worldwide4 to access public and private services 
and digitally sign documents. Furthermore, some companies5 provide identity management 
technical frameworks to build DIW based on decentralised identitiesb and pilots have been 
developed in research projects in recent years (see referenced literature).
1.3	
Purpose and scope of this TechDispatch
The purpose of this TechDispatch is to introduce its readers to the concept of DIW and provide 
an analysis framework that can be used to assess a particular implementation. The document 
describes the role of DIWs for digital identification, authentication and authorisation in 
transactions, offering readers a perspective that will help them to better understand what 
privacy risksc exist when using a DIW. It also discusses relevant data protection by design 
and by default measures that could be implemented to mitigate such risks. Eventually, the 
document will assess how the EUDIW, mandated by the eIDAS 2 Regulation6, fits within the 
framework outlined.
The assessment of data protection risks does not consider specific use cases, but rather refers 
to the ‘by design’ features of the DIW. The TechDispatch does not explore all dimensions and 
flavours of the DIW concept but rather introduces these matters with a view to supporting the 
discussion on the selected privacy and data protection risks and mitigating measures.
b	 See Chapter 3 for different types of digital identity management models.
c	
The terms privacy and data protection, despite representing two distinct fundamental rights in the EU legal 
framework, will be used interchangeably in this document to reflect a wider understanding where the term 
privacy also encompasses data protection.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
6
2.	 Digital identity management ecosystem 
and models and relevant privacy issues
2.1	
Actors of the identity management ecosystem 
and terminology used
We can in general identify four main actors within the identity management ecosystem. We 
present what we consider a common terminology to identify these actors, but alternative 
names are also introduced.
•	 Relying parties (RPs) - They provide digital services to users (e.g. tax filing), which 
is why they are also called service providers (SPs) in the literature. Alternatively, 
they may need to verify the identity and/or credentials of wallet users for various 
reasons (e.g. a police officer verifying the authenticity and integrity of a driving 
licence). An RP may also be referred to as a ‘verifier’.
•	 Users who wish to access via digital means the services offered by service 
providers/relying parties or whose identity or credentials need to be verified 
by them. In particular, when using a DIW, a user may also be referred to as a 
‘holder’.
•	 Identity and attribute providers (IdPs) - They provide users with the means 
(credentials) to authenticate themselves to, or to be authorised by, relying 
parties/service providers. They may also be referred to as ‘issuers’, since they 
are the entities that issue users’ credentials. Identity providers may be defined 
by law or by national authorities, or directly or indirectly by the community of 
the users and RPs based on the established governance of these communities.

In addition, often IdPs take on the role of ‘revocation manager’, as they basically 
manage the entire credential lifecycle, including the revocation of the validity of 
credentials. The employment of credential validity periods and revocation can 
significantly reduce frauds caused by stolen and lost credentials.
•	 Scheme authority - A ‘competent authority’, usually appointed by law, to 
oversee the fair and lawful implementation of the framework, or an arbitration 
body that is commonly agreed upon or accepted by all the other actors. The 
role of the scheme authority is to manage the governance of the framework for 
trusted and effective functioning. For example, national competent authorities 
exist for the EU Digital Identity Framework and the European Digital Identity 
Wallet (EUDIW). Describing the EUDIW framework role is out of the scope of 
this document. You can read the relevant referenced literature, as also recalled 
in Chapter 6.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
7
Figure 17 - Example of interaction among actors in an identity management ecosystem
Other roles may be identified also based on how trust is managed among different actors or 
based on operational needs.
In principle, an identity management framework can also be designed so that a specific role 
for the IdP, as distinguished from the user, is completely excluded. Users can act as providers 
of their own identity, in which case the trust relationship between users and RPs/SPs would 
need to be established directly. We elaborate more on this option in the next section.
2.2	
	 Digital identity models
Various digital identity models have been developed over time and are currently in use. In 
this section, we describe these models and assess their respective pros and cons, with a 
particular focus on the ability of the digital identity framework actors to track and profile users’ 
transactions.
The isolated identity model
A model widely used is the isolated identity model. Here the relying party/service provider 
(RP/SP) acts also as an identity provider (IdP). The user is given (or allowed to choose) certain 
credentials (e.g. user ID and password) at registration time, which are verified by the same RP 
at subsequent access requests. These credentials are exclusively linked to that specific RP (e.g. 
a flight booking website).

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
8
Main relevant considerations:
•	 The user has to manage separate credentials for each and every RP, which may 
be a burden and expose them to security breaches.
•	 Credentials remain with the RP, which in theory could misuse them or manage 
them insecurely, despite users generally having the opportunity to change their 
credentials if they so wish.
•	 On the other hand, transactions with different RPs have no connection among 
them by design, since each RP is also a separate IdP.
•	 However, there is always a risk of linking different transactions if RPs collude with 
each other, enabling user profiling across different services. Or, if the user utilises 
the same credentials for different RPs (e.g. the same user ID and password for 
different websites), access to their credentials can anyhow give access to multiple 
services on behalf of the user.
The centralised identity model
In the centralised identity model, an identity provider (IdP) exists separately from service 
providers/relying parties (SPs/RPs). Users can register with an IdP once and use the same 
credentials issued by that IdP to access various RPs. There are various commercial examples of 
RPs that initially acted as an IdP for their own services in an ‘isolated model’, and now also act 
as a centralised IdP for other RPs that trust them.8
In this model, user credentials are stored within IdPs. In general, when authenticating against 
an RP, the latter redirects the user to the IdP, which verifies the credentials and provides the 
response to the RP.
Main relevant considerations:
•	 Increased usability with respect to the isolated model since the same credentials 
can be used to authenticate against various RPs (single-sign-on principle). Yet 
there could be some scalability concerns for the IdP.
•	 Credentials are no longer in the hands of the various RPs but are all in the hands 
of a unique entity. This reduces the attack surface for the credentials of a single 
user but the centralised IdP becomes a single point of failure from a functionality 
and security point of view, with the possible compromise of a large amount of 
user credentials.
•	 In case the credentials verification process by the RP entails a communication 
between the RP and the IdP, the centralisation of identity management enables 
the IdP to learn about all the transactions carried out by the same user (via 
the common credentials) with different RPs. This can enable the IdP to build a 
profile of these users, at least limited to those services relying on the specific 
IdP. Moreover, the user has no control over the data shared by the IdP to the RP.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
9
The federated identity model
It is possible to design a federated identity model, based on a federated architecture of 
identity providers (IdP), where the credentials provided by one IdP are also recognised by RPs 
associated with other federated IdPs. This model leverages trust relationships among multiple 
domains and can bridge the incompatibility gap among many identity domains, each of which 
is supported by a different centralised identity management. A user may decide to use any of 
the IdPs of the federation to access an RP that is not natively served by that IdP.
Main relevant considerations:
•	 Further increased usability based on the single-sign-on principle.
•	 Scalability can be better managed by balancing (when it is possible) the various 
IdPs.
•	 In principle, credentials can be distributed among IdPs, offering the possibility 
to solve availability problems and mitigate the single point of failure problem of 
centralised IdPs. On the other hand, the overall security would depend on the 
weakest IdP (which could e.g. create false credentials for users from other IdPs).
•	 Along the same line of reasoning, breaking down a centralised model into many 
federated ones might mitigate (unless there is collusion among them) the user 
profiling risk.
The user-centric identity paradigm
The design of the aforementioned models implies that credentials are not under the user’s 
control and could be used, though in different ways and at different levels, to track their 
transactions. Solutions have been proposed for users to store credentials issued by an IdP in 
a device or a digital infrastructure, to some extent under the user’s control, as part of a user-
centric identity paradigm.
Main relevant considerations:
•	 Removing the need to access the IdP to verify the user’s credentials at each 
and every request of the RP mitigates the risk that the IdP could profile users by 
observing and linking the user’s transactions with different RPs.
•	 This model would also mitigate the risk of IdPs as honeypots for attacks against 
a treasure trove of credentials.
This model does not necessarily eliminate the need for the existence of an IdP as distinguished 
from the user. In user-centric solutions, IdP functions are, however, limited to the generation, 
issuance and revocation of the user credentials.
The Digital Identity Wallet is considered as the key element of a user-centric identity 
paradigm. Its features, advantages and risks are detailed in the next chapter.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
10
The decentralised identity model and the concept of Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI)
The most meaningful interpretation of the expression ‘decentralised identity model’ is not so 
much the possibility of having multiple IdPs providing credentials to an EUDIW, but rather the 
one that aligns with the concept of Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) and the absence of a single 
source of trust. The introduction of the concept of SSI represents a further step in the direction 
of user autonomy and independence from centralised IdPs9. The SSI concept focuses the user-
centric paradigm on user autonomy in asserting and managing their identity. Christopher Allen 
proposed an SSI manifesto in 2016, featuring ten principles10. The SSI concept has been used 
and implemented with different meanings and interpretations11. Its original conceptualisation 
focuses on the total absence of a central provider of trust, often called the ‘root of trust’, 
with users potentially making ‘claims’ about themselves without relying on a central identity 
provider (e.g. the state and its trusted authorities). It is up to the relying parties involved to 
place confidence or not in the claims made by the users, based on the established and agreed 
mechanisms of trust. These mechanisms may be based on technology and organisation, for 
example leveraging cryptography and organisational rules, as in blockchain-based systems12, 
or what is called the ‘web of trust’13, a mechanism to build trust through a network of individual 
endorsements of cryptographic signatures of other users securely communicated via channels 
they mutually rely upon. To implement real-world use cases that require a high level of 
trust, such as in highly regulated domains like healthcare or finance, identity management 
frameworks based on the SSI model can be adapted to rely in some way on other commonly 
recognised roots of trust, such as those recognised by law.14

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
11
3.	 The Digital Identity Wallet: uses cases 
and features
This chapter outlines the use cases and high-level features of a Digital Identity Wallet (DIW). 
The next chapter then introduces more detail on data protection risks, requirements and risk-
mitigating measures.
3.1	
How a Digital Identity Wallet materialises in 
practice
Extensive research and pilot projects have identified the building blocks and features of 
DIWs.15 However, DIWs have only recently begun to be deployed in real-world projects, mainly 
due to advancements in the security features and computational capacity of mobile devices, 
on which most of them are hosted. They range from solutions for managing publicly available 
digital identities to access public and private services (e.g. local public administration services, 
public health services, financial services and private banking services)d to identity management 
solutions for private and public closed user groups (e.g. university cards for authentication)16.
Original: Digital identity wallet solutions are typically implemented through a combination 
of mobile applications and cloud infrastructure. Literature review and internet research on 
advertised solutions17 indicates that mobile applications are the most common implementation 
approach. Mobile apps can feature user-friendly interfaces and mobile devices can embed 
secure hardware elementse to store credentials. In some applications, credentials may also 
be stored externally, such as in smart cards, and communicate with the mobile device via 
proximity technologies such as Near Field Communication (NFC).18
In other approaches, credentials and other data are stored in the cloud, where they are 
encrypted and the encryption key is managed in a way that even the cloud provider has no 
intelligible access to it. Cloud services are also used for complementary services to the wallet 
functionality, for example for credentials backup and synchronisation across devices, to timely 
propagate credential revocation, or to create interoperability bridges among different wallet 
implementations.
Some DIW projects leverage ledger technology and, more specifically, blockchain technology. 
Its permissioned19 management model enables greater control, confidentiality and performance 
than a permissionless one. This model has been favoured in use cases where there is more 
need for centralised governance and regulatory compliance. In DIWs, the distributed ledger 
serves mainly as a decentralised registry for credential issuance and verification.
d	 See some examples in section 1.2 and its notes.
e	 See section 4.1 for more detail on ‘secure elements’.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
12
3.2	
The Digital Identity Wallet use cases for 
identification, authorisation and digital signatures
Before asking for access to any resource or being verified, it is essential that the DIW possesses 
the relevant valid credentials. All identification data and other personal attributes the DIW 
requests from an IdP are signed20 by a relevant IdP, thus ensuring their authenticity and integrity, 
and then issued to the DIW as credentials. They are then stored within the wallet in a secure 
way and presented to RPs when necessary.
It is then important to distinguish the concepts of identification (and authentication) from the 
concept of authorisation.
In some situations, we may be asked to prove our identity (i.e. to prove that we are who we 
claim we are) to access a service or because our identity needs verification, for example by 
a law enforcement officer. What is required of us is our identification, i.e. the disclosure of 
data (such as name, surname, date and place of birth, etc.) to uniquely identify us as a natural 
person in a way that is trusted by the RP. A DIW will contain all this information in an electronic, 
interoperable format and, as an indispensable feature, must give RPs reasonable assurance of 
the trustworthiness of that information. Another term we often see used for identification is 
authentication. More specifically, though, we can talk about authentication when the person, 
who has already identified themselves to the RP, needs to provide evidence of their identity.
For example, the first time we access a healthcare provider, its administration will ask for our 
identity data (our identification), which we may have in our DIW. The healthcare provider might 
then issue credentials that we can store in our DIW and use to authenticate ourselves whenever 
we use its services.
In other situations, we may need access to certain resources or services for which only an 
authorisation is required without the need to disclose our identity. For example, when we 
need to prove that we have the minimum age required to browse websites restricted to adults, 
or to be allowed as students to enter a university facility.
When the DIW holder wants to access the resource or the service, they present the required 
credentials to the RP, which verifies their authenticity and validity, including non-expiration, 
and, if the outcome is positive, grants the access.
In general, credentials released by the IdP are not forever and have an expiration date. The DIW 
or any RP might also ask the ‘revocation manager’ for a revocation if they believe credentials 
have been compromised. In this case, the DIW will need the IdP to issue new valid credentials 
to access again the resource or the service.
A DIW can also create a digital signature on behalf of a user by using cryptographic material 
(specific files with content and format suitable to cryptographic applications), such as digital 
certificates, signed and provided by an IdP and stored in the DIW. The DIW generates a pair 
of cryptographic keys21: a private key, which is kept secret by the signer and stored securely in 
the wallet, and a public key, which is shared with others to verify the signature. If a user wants 
to sign a document, this can be done either within the wallet, without exposing these sensitive 
cryptographic elements to external applications, or via an external service after providing it 
with the necessary authorisation in a secure way.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
13
3.3	
Potential advantages of well-designed Digital 
Identity Wallets
Well-designed DIWs can represent means to enhance user’s control, privacy and data security, 
as well as convenience and interoperability.
A DIW should integrate features to enhance user control over the personal information 
contained therein. DIWs would typically provide a dashboard to verify dynamically the status 
of their data and credentials, for example in the case of a wallet containing tickets for public 
transport. Furthermore, users would be able to monitor what attributes or credentials the RP 
requires access to and would be able to decide whether and what to disclose to the RP. Then, if 
the identity management framework provides for it, the wallet might be able to verify whether 
the RP is entitled (by the scheme authority) to even ask for these attributes. Ultimately, if this fits 
the specific use case, users may be able to decide the value of certain of their DIW attributes, 
such as user preferences for user consent management or to specify dietary requirements for 
online food shops. This may not be the case, for example, when the law stipulates that specific 
IdPs must issue legally valid identification data for identity cards and certain travel documents 
(e.g. passports).
Many identity wallet solutions incorporate hardware-based security elements, providing 
stronger security protection for user credentials compared to more traditional storage 
technology using only general-purpose hardware (see section 4.1).
Both these advantages of enhanced user control and security can provide a good basis for a 
better privacy protection of DIW users. A more complete assessment of the personal data 
protection impact of DIWs and of the relevant mitigating measures is provided in the next 
chapter.
DIWs can provide more user friendliness in accessing digital services. They can enable users 
to store multiple identity credentials in one location always at hand and authenticate to or 
get authorisation from multiple service providers. This eliminates the need to remember and 
manage credentials in a separate way for different service providers. The information stored in 
the DIW can be used to register to different services online and provide the needed information 
without re-entering the same info once again for each service.
DIWs can be designed as an element of an overall interoperable identification scheme to 
provide interoperability amongst many IdPs and RPs, including across different countries. 
This implies consensus among all participant actors and an overarching policy and technical 
agreement managed by a scheme authority, as well as the adoption of standards and 
common protocols, in particular for the issuance and management of credentials and of the 
authentication/authorisation of DIWs against RPs.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
14
3.4	
Currently deployed technology frameworks 
for (verifiable) credentials
The use of verifiable credentials requires technological frameworks, supported by a governance 
structure and relevant rules agreed by all the participants in the ecosystem. These frameworks 
are made up of trust models/assumptions, cryptographic primitives, protocols and data 
formats. They have been developed over the years, with some of them becoming standardised. 
They have been designed to provide the functionalities needed to build trust among the 
stakeholders of the identity management ecosystem (see section 2.1). These functionalities 
include:
•	 the trustworthy issuance of credentials from IdPs;
•	 the binding of credentials to a user and a DIW device owned by that user (see 
section 5.1);
•	 the trustworthy presentation of credentials to and their verification by RPs;
•	 the revocation of credentials.
The variety of deployed solutions affects all layers of the technical architecture. Here, we 
mention a couple of examples of sets of protocols, emphasising the specifications of the 
format of verifiable credentials and their interface protocols, particularly those used to verify 
their authenticity and integrity. Further information can be found in the literature.22
Various solutions have been identified to implement verifiable credentials. Among those 
currently most deployed, we refer here to the one based on the so-called mobile driving 
license ISO/IEC 18013 family of standards. These standards have been conceived to define 
the technical and operational requirements for digital mobile driving licenses but are now 
being adopted in other use cases. They were born in proximity verification use cases (e.g. 
with a verifier communicating to the user’s mobile device through an NFC protocol) and aim 
to define a full solution, including protocols, data formats and security measures. The most 
famous standard of the family is ISO/IEC 18013-523, which defines, among others, a credentials 
data format, called ‘mdoc’, and the interface against the credentials verifier (the RP). A new 
standard of the family issued in 2024 (ISO/IEC 18013-7) extends the use of this protocol, 
originally born for proximity cases, for remote presentation of credentials over the internet.
Another set of solutions used and currently further developed is the one defined by the World 
Wide Web Consortium (W3C). They include the W3C Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs)24 and 
the W3C Verifiable Credentials (W3C VCs)25, as well as other standards for data authenticity 
and integrity. In particular, the W3C VCs defines a general-purpose data model for verifiable 
credentials and mandates to choose cryptographic primitives enabling privacy friendly featuresf. 
It also contains a rich non-normative text that is very useful to those seeking to develop an in-
depth understanding of the verifiable credentials and identity management ecosystem, with 
a wide section on relevant privacy concerns. While the W3C had originally issued only a data 
format standard, the latest release of standards goes in the direction of providing a more 
complete suite of solutions by also proposing specific signature algorithms26.
f	
Selective disclosure and unlinkability - see chapter 4 for their meaning

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
15
4.	 Data protection requirements and risks
Digital Identify Wallets (DIWs) are used to identify, authenticate and authorise users against 
RPs, performing many transactions over time. Unauthorised access to a user’s DIW could reveal 
personal data, including sensitive information. Access to a user’s transactions and the ability to 
link them would enable a party to learn about the user’s choices, behaviour and actions. They 
could then draw inferences from this information and build an even richer user profile. This 
would significantly interfere with the user’s private life and pose a high risk to their fundamental 
rights. Unfair and unlawful exploitation of user profiles can have prejudicial consequences for 
DIW users, including serious ones. This has a greater impact in situations where the DIW is 
used widely, such as when it is mandatory by law for certain use cases.
In this document, we will mainly address the design choices of DIWs that can mitigate risks, 
focusing on the principles of data protection by design and by default. However, we will not 
perform a full analysis of the risks to people’s fundamental rights, nor a complete analysis of 
compliance with applicable data protection laws and their principles.
We limit ourselves to the following risks (and related data protection requirements):
•	 risk to integrity and confidentiality of the DIW;
•	 risk of over-disclosure towards relying parties;
•	 risk of linkability of the DIW transactions, enabling tracking and profiling.
4.1	
Risk to integrity and confidentiality of the 
Digital Identity Wallet
The GDPR’s integrity and confidentiality principle provides that personal data should be 
processed “in a manner that ensures appropriate security”.27 In this section, we consider the 
security risks and requirements for DIWs. The security of the credentials managed by the DIW 
also depends on the security of its interactions with other identity management framework 
actors, particularly IdPs for issuing and revoking credentials, and RPs for accessing DIW data. 
In this section, we focus solely on the security of the wallet itself.
Storing sensitive personal information within a single entity (the DIW) rather than with several 
service providers may increase an individual’s risk if relevant security measures fail. This is 
particularly true when personal data is stored on a specific user’s mobile device, and it could 
be even riskier in cloud-based DIWs, where the same cloud service provider may store the data 
of many users.
However, mobile devices offer a large attack surface due to the DIW app’s integration with 
the device’s operating system and other apps. Hackers could exploit these vulnerabilities to 
access the DIW. Furthermore, the security of mobile devices also relies heavily on the user 
owning them, and often depends on their awareness, skills and context.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
16
For example, hackers could exploit security weaknesses in mobile apps or malware to gain 
system-level access and then exfiltrate or modify DIW data. Also, if a mobile device without 
access protection is lost or stolen and the DIW app is not protected by robust authentication, 
an individual in physical possession of the device could impersonate the DIW owner.
4.2	
Risk of over-disclosure towards relying parties
The GDPR principle of data minimisation provides that personal data shall be “adequate, 
relevant and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which they are 
processed”.28 This is also known as the necessity and proportionality principle.
As previously discussed, the DIW is designed to enable users to manage their own personal 
credentials and other data. Users can disclose this information to RPs either to access a 
resource or to allow them to verify certain credentials. However, this functionality carries a 
risk of unintended over-disclosure of personal data29, which goes against the principle of data 
minimisation. DIWs facilitate seamless interaction with digital service providers, but this carries 
a greater risk of unintentional and imperceptible disclosure of personal data than providing 
paper documents or manually filling in electronic forms. This is particularly pertinent when 
we consider the sensitivity and wide range of personal data that a DIW can store. This risk is 
also increased by a propensity of certain relying parties towards over-asking (requesting more 
personal data than needed).
The data minimisation principle implies that a DIW user should be able to securely disclose to 
an RP only the pieces of information necessary for the processing of personal data by that RP, 
for which the user has given consent or exercised the expected control.
The requirement enabling a DIW to present to an RP only a subset of attributes within the 
given credentials is called ‘selective disclosure’.30 If, for example, the DIW credentials refer to 
a user’s national identification attribute alongside other attributes and if the RP only needs to 
know the user’s nationality, the DIW must be able to display only the user’s nationality without 
revealing all the other attributes. Another use case is age verification, whereby an RP verifies 
that a user is an adult or is above a certain minimum age or within an age range. In this case, it 
is unnecessary to disclose the user’s date of birth contained within the identification data. It is 
sufficient to disclose an attribute, issued by an IdP and trusted by the RP, or a value calculated 
based on the user’s birthdate, which shows that the user is within that age range.
Furthermore, selective disclosure implies that there should be a way to share credentials 
enabling authorisation without identification (often in literature also called ‘anonymous 
authentication’), when identification is not a necessary element of the processing of personal 
data, based on its established lawful purposes. In the nationality or age verification cases, 
for example, we have seen how it is not necessary to disclose the identity of the DIW user. 
Similarly, it is not necessary to disclose the identity of a user when verifying a theatre ticket 
stored in their DIW. Likewise, it is not necessary to reveal the identity of a driver when verifying 
a driving licence in their DIW, unless the outcome of the verification process has consequences 
for the driver that might require their identification (e.g. a legal fine). Also, service providers 
often require users to create an account and provide personal information that is not strictly 
necessary for accessing certain services.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
17
Authorisation without identification mitigatesg (or even avoids) the risk of unnecessary 
identifiability of the user of the DIW and thus any further tracking and profiling.
4.3	
Risk of linkability of transactions, enabling 
tracking and profiling
The data minimisation principle implies also that the different user transactions should not be 
linked together (unlinkability), unless this is a necessary element of the processing of personal 
data, based on its established lawful purposes.
The risk of linkability (and thus of identifiability and profiling) exists when the management 
of credentials, from their issuing from IdPs to their presentation to RPs and their possible 
revocation, entails the use of unique identifiers for a specific user among different transactions. 
Credentials provided by IdPs in traditional authentication/authorisation protocols usually 
contain those unique identifiers.
IdPs and RPs might keep track of all the interactions of the DIW with RPs and be able to build 
a profile based on the DIW transactions.
For example, IdPs under the control of government authorities or private companies could 
gather information about the habits and behaviours of any individual using a DIW when 
accessing online or proximity services or whenever their identity or attributes are verified by 
an RP.
In certain circumstances, it may be necessary to establish a link between transactions. For 
instance, competent authorities conducting anti-fraud activities may need to link transactions 
by the same DIW user to verify suspicious activity. In this case, this should be carried out 
without identifying the user. Identification would then only be needed in those situations where 
it is required to further investigate potential fraud. Conversely, when verifying the validity of a 
transport ticket, it is generally not necessary for the verifier to link different checks performed 
on the same user.
The unlinkability requirement contributes to implement the data minimisation and purpose 
limitation principles and mitigates the risk of identifiability of the DIW user.
g	 The conditions for this to happen will be explained in section 5.2

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
18
In a digital identity framework, we can consider various DIW unlinkability requirements.31
•	 Unlinkability with respect to RPs
If a DIW presents their credentials to an RP on multiple occasions, that RP should 
not be able to determine whether these transactions correspond to the same 
user or a different one. The same principle applies when a DIW presents their 
credentials to several RPs, even if they collude and share the data they obtain 
from the DIW.
If there is a lawful reason to link many transactions of the same DIW, the principle 
of data minimisation also applies. This implies that only the data necessary for 
processing (i.e. connecting two transactions) should be disclosed beyond the 
credentials presented by the DIW.
•	 Unlinkability with respect to IdPs
The IdP should not learn about DIW transactions, i.e. what credentials a DIW 
presents to what RP and when. This kind of unlinkability is sometimes referred to 
as ‘unobservability’ of the DIW transactions by the IdP.
As we saw in section 2.2, moving to a user-centric architecture where a DIW can 
store credentials issued by an IdP eliminates the need to consult the IdP every 
time an RP needs access to them. Consequently, this DIW feature mitigates this 
particular risk of direct linkability by the IdP by design. See, though, the next two 
risks for a complete picture on IdPs.
•	 Unlinkability with respect to revocation managers
We also need to consider the unlinkability of DIW transactions against ‘revocation 
managers’ (IdPs or other entities acting as custodians of credential status). When 
RPs verify the revocation status of DIW credentials against a revocation manager, 
the latter could learn which RPs the DIW interacts with and when.
•	 Unlinkability with respect to colluding IdPs and RPs
This requirement considers the possibility that IdPs and RPs collude and exchange 
the information they know about the DIW, its credentials and transactions. Even 
in this case, it is important that DIW transactions could not be linked among 
them.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
19
5.	 Mitigating measures for the selected 
data protection risks
5.1	
Ensuring integrity and confidentiality
To ensure the integrity and confidentiality of the Digital Identify Wallet (DIW), robust encryption 
is essential when managing sensitive data such as credentials, regardless of the infrastructure 
storing them (e.g. mobile device or cloud). Strong end-to-end encryption is required when 
this data needs to be transferred to ensure that it remains unreadable even if it is intercepted. 
All this without forgetting the need to stand future quantum-based attacks via post-quantum 
cryptography.
Integrating separate hardware components and implementing a higher level of segregation for 
critical use cases, including key management, provides greater protection than mobile devices’ 
general-purpose hardware and operating systems, or general-purpose cloud infrastructures.32 
This is why DIWs should be deployed in devices that contain dedicated secure elements (SEs), 
which provide a physically separate secure environment, and/or platform-specific trusted 
execution environments (TEEs) for isolating cryptographic operations and sensitive data 
storage.
An SE contains a microprocessor chip engineered in a way that can store sensitive data and 
perform critical operations while offering lower exposure to threats. It acts as a vault, protecting 
the applications and data from typical malware attacks on the host operating system. Examples 
of secure elements for mobile devices include external hardware devices specifically designed 
for cryptographic operations, such as security tokens or smart ID cards. Secure elements such as 
SIMs, embedded SIMs (eSIMs) and embedded secure elements (eSEs) can also be integrated 
within the mobile device’s architecture. Current versions of mobile operating systems offer 
APIs to support operations with SEs, including embedded ones.
A TEE is an isolated environment within a device’s main processor33 designed to protect 
sensitive operations and data from the rest of the device processing components, including 
the operating system and other applications. Often TEEs are used in combination with SEs, 
and some authors use the term TEE as already encompassing the integrated solution.
In cloud infrastructures, the solution may be provided by an isolated environment supported 
by dedicated hardened servers.34 Hardware Secure Modules (HSMs) and other secure elements 
can also be deployed within a cloud infrastructure and connected to servers. A cloud-based 
architecture can relieve the mobile device of the burden of security management, enabling 
features such as credential recovery in the event of a lost device. However, it can present 
challenges in terms of availability and use in an offline context, where the device is not 
connected to the internet and proximity-based protocols are used instead.
In a DIW-based framework, it is essential to ensure that credentials are tied to the DIW device 
that requests their issuance or verification. This prevents credentials from being transferred to 
unauthorised devices, thereby protecting against theft or cloning. This feature is called ‘device 
binding’. A high level of assurance can be achieved by cryptographically linking a device’s 
public key to a private key stored in a secure element of the device.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
20
Of course, the overall security level of the solution as well as the final binding of the DIW 
credentials to the user, is strongly determined by the user’s access control to the mobile device 
and its functionalities. This should feature strong multi-factor authentication, including secure 
biometrics.
Overall, DIWs are intended to provide effective security measures, particularly for use cases 
requiring a high level of trust (e.g. government identification, law enforcement, border control 
and health services). This level of trust maybe set by specific regulatory security requirements, 
which can also provide for a mandatory certification as is the case for the European Digital 
Identity Wallet (EUDIW) (see section 6.3).
Even DIWs supported by the above solutions may have potential security weaknesses.
Firstly, users are responsible for managing the security of the mobile device on which the DIW 
data is stored. They may prioritise usability over a high level of access control; for example, 
they may not enable multi-factor strong authentication if the DIW application does not make 
it mandatory for the given use case.
While the embedded SEs of many current mobile devices provide strong security guarantees, 
their cryptographic functionality is often limited (e.g. storing cryptographic keys and performing 
some standardised operations to create digital signatures), which is insufficient to mitigate 
certain risks associated with the use of DIWs (see section 5.2)35. This means that changes to the 
current SE design by mobile manufacturers, as well as changes to the supporting operating 
system functionalities, would be necessary. However, these changes could not be implemented 
in the short term, particularly for lower-cost devices.
For this reason, many implementations rely on trusted execution environments (TEEs) rather 
than the full hardware-based protection provided by secure elements (SEs). However, research 
has demonstrated36 that if these environments are not correctly designed, they may remain 
vulnerable to side-channel attacks and weaknesses in the TEE architecture and software 
implementation that could compromise sensitive credential data.
5.2	
Selective disclosure and unlinkability: the case 
for anonymous credentials
The evolution of the internet has prioritised functionality and resilience over security and privacy. 
In particular, although the identification and development of privacy-enhancing protocols has 
a long history in research projects and pilots, it has not yet received adequate follow-up in 
standardisation, and the deployment of solutions in real-world scenarios is limited.
Relevant literature identifies the origin of privacy-preserving solutions for authentication in the 
foundational work of cryptographer David Chaum.37 These solutions began to be developed 
further in the early 2000s and have been widely explored in research, with a further boost in 
recent years due to DIW projects, particularly the EUDIW.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
21
High-level concept and features of anonymous credentials
This family of privacy-preserving solutions for authentication can be referred to as ‘anonymous 
credentials’, given their focus on their privacy-oriented design and features. These mechanisms 
support both selective disclosure38 and the unlinkability requirements mentioned above. 
In this context, the term ‘anonymous’ refers to the ability to provide authentication without 
identification and to minimise data disclosure. Whether a user remains anonymous depends 
on the wider context39.
Anonymous credentials are based on the use of advanced cryptographic techniques40 whose 
purpose is to provide mathematical proof of a claim (e.g. the authenticity of a document 
and its origin), without disclosing any additional information. Rather than delving into 
the complexities of cryptography, we will provide a high-level overview of the concept of 
anonymous credentials.41 Further information can be found in the reference literature.
The following text provides a simplified account of how anonymous credentials work within the 
simple identification framework described in section 2.1.
Figure 2, inspired by Slamaning, D. (2025)
We consider a user who has been given a certified credential by an IdP, attesting to the 
authenticity of certain user attributes (set A in figure 2). These attributes and credentials can 
be stored in a DIW. These attributes could include, for example, the information fields of 
an ID document issued by a public authority, as well as any other attributes that the public 
authority may certify. The credentials can be viewed as the relevant IdP’s digital signature on 
these attributes. When the user needs to show one or more attributes (subset A1) to an RP1, 
the anonymous credential provides the DIW with a disclosure protocol that enables the DIW 
to reveal only a subset of the attributes issued by the IdP (e.g. date of birth) or calculations 
made on them (e.g. whether the age is within a certain range). Similarly, the same user can 
disclose other attributes (e.g. nationality) (subset A2) to another RP (RP2) that requires only those 
attributes. This protocol assures the RPs that they are interacting with a user/DIW that has a 
valid credential from the issuer for the subset of attributes disclosed to them. This example 
can be successfully extended to multiple IdPs and multiple credentials within a DIW. Different 
presentations of credentials from the same DIW do not share any unique identifiers among 
them, let alone the user identity. This ensures that these presentations cannot be linked to 
each other, and thus that DIW transactions cannot be linked either.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
22
Anonymous credentials may have many other useful features, some of which are not unique to 
this type of credentials. Some among the most peculiar and critical:
•	 Non-transferability - To prevent credentials from being unlawfully copied or 
stolen and used by another DIW, or even by an RP to which they are presented. 
As seen in section 5.1, the credentials are bound to the user and its device using 
a secure feature linked to the hardware when signing them (typically the public 
key of a key pair, where the private key is securely stored in the device) and 
biometrics are used for strong user authentication to prevent the device from 
being used successfully by other individuals (e.g. family members or hackers).
•	 Issuer-hiding - In certain circumstances, it may be critical for privacy reasons 
to reveal which IdP issued the credentials. Furthermore, disclosing multiple 
credentials from multiple issuers may also reveal information.42 Rather than 
revealing the specific issuer, the user could instead demonstrate that they meet 
an ‘issuer policy’ accepted by the verifier — for example, the membership to a 
trusted set of issuers.
•	 Trustful pseudonyms generation - In case it is necessary to link transactions 
belonging to the same users without the need to identify them, it is possible to 
generate a pseudonym to be disclosed to the RP without revealing any static 
permanent identifiers. The pseudonyms, chosen by the DIW, not permanent 
and context based, would avoid identification and profiling when not needed. It 
could be construed starting from a unique identifier within the credentials and 
other parameters specific to the use case or categories of use cases, as well as 
parameters characterising the RP.
Cryptographic algorithms for anonymous credentialsh.
While they all satisfy the unlinkability requirements, one distinction can be made as to whether 
the signed attributes are disclosed to the RP, or whether only a ‘predicate’ (a statement) based 
on those attributes is disclosed. If a DIW wants to provide a trusted statement to an RP based 
on its attributes without revealing their value, it can offer a ‘zero-knowledge proof’ (ZKP)43 
based on those values. For example, if a user wants to prove that they are within a certain age 
range, they can provide an RP with a ZKP based on their date of birth without disclosing it.
Anonymous credentials can be designed using specific types of cryptographic signature 
schemes that are computationally efficient and can be used proficiently to build ZKPs. Among 
these signatures, we mention Camenisch-Lysyanskaya (CL) ones44 and BBS/BBS+ ones45. 
Anonymous credentials can also be built based on any signature scheme, such as the Elliptic 
Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA)46 or a non-interactive zero-knowledge (NIZK) proof 
system47. Although difficult to implement in practice due to computational challenges, recent 
proposals claim an easier use of generic signatures for anonymous credentials, thus enabling 
the creation of ZKPs from credentials signed with any signature and digital identity scheme48. 
This could facilitate the practical adoption of these credentials.
h	 As announced, the short cryptography-related sections that follow only function to provide an idea of the state 
of the art and limitations, while giving some main references for further info. It does not aim to be exhaustive nor 
need the referenced algorithms to be understood for the purposes of this document.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
23
Deployment status and challenges
Anonymous credentials in all their different algorithmic forms have been widely proposed at 
research and prototype level for around 25 years now, yet they have seen limited deployment 
in real-life solutions49. The IBM Idemix system is reported in the literature as the first project 
to use (multi-use50) anonymous credentials.51 Since the initial work by Chaum and others, new 
cryptographic solutions have been designed and tested. These solutions have attempted to 
fulfil the previously mentioned data minimisation requirements, such as selective disclosure 
and unlinkability, while also addressing the specific challenges associated with meeting all the 
other essential requirements of the designed solution. These requirements include holder and 
device binding and accountability, credentials revocation and credentials delegation (from 
a trusted issuer to another issuing entity), as well as support for user-friendly digital identity 
management solutions, primarily for mobile devices. Examples of these challenges include:52
•	 Certain anonymous credentials cannot be directly bound to the secure elements 
of current mobile devices since they are based on signature schemes that are 
not supported by the hardware deployed in mainstream mobile devices.
•	 Certain solutions, particularly those enabling the use of any type of signature 
scheme, may require significant computational resources for the cryptographic 
generation and verification of credentials.
•	 Privacy-friendly revocation implementation is a complex challenge that uses 
specific cryptographic constructs and often requires compromises to achieve an 
efficient solution53.
•	 Non-agility in the use of different cryptographic algorithms (e.g. signature 
scheme) makes them unfit for change, particularly in view of decryption risks 
arising from increased computing power and quantum computing.i
•	 Current lack of standardisation for many of the proposed solutions represents an 
obstacle to widespread real-world adoption.
Recently, scientific literature has proposed many solutions to these challenges, and there 
have been increased efforts towards standardisation54. The debate over the current technical 
proposal for the EUDIW has accelerated developments, including those from industry.
For example, efforts are being made to further develop BBS/BBS+ signature-based credentials 
so that they can work with cryptographic primitives that are already accepted by the secure 
hardware and software currently deployed in commonly used mobile devices.55 Alternatively, 
anonymous credentials based on general-purpose zero-knowledge proofs have been 
proposed, which are able to work with any signature schemes and can cope with many of 
the aforementioned challenges within an acceptable computational effort56 . Research is also 
exploring how to efficiently integrate post-quantum cryptographic primitives into anonymous 
credentials57.
i	
Despite this challenge not being specific to anonymous credentials, it is an essential requirement worth 
mentioning.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
24
While there is a “need for service providers to strike a balance between protocol sophistication, 
implementation intricacy, and resource constraints” 58, the situation is rapidly evolving and may 
lead policymakers and service providers towards solutions that do not compromise privacy 
requirements. The European Telecommunication Standards Institute (ETSI) has issued a 
technical report59 which provides a “general yet comprehensive analysis of signature schemes, 
formats and protocols with different degrees of maturity that cater for selective disclosure, 
unlinkability, and predicate proofs”, with a view to their application in the EUDIW. While 
describing the current situation and limitations, the report refers to ongoing projects trying to 
bridge existing gaps.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
25
6.	 The EU Digital Identity Wallet
6.1	
The EU Digital Identity Framework and Wallet
Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 on electronic identification and trust services for electronic 
transactions in the internal market (hereinafter referred to as ‘the (eIDAS) Regulation’) was 
adopted in 2014 to establish a new system for secure electronic transactions between 
businesses, citizens and public authorities across the EU60. The eIDAS Regulation was then 
amended in 2024 (by Regulation (EU) 2024/1183 hereinafter referred to as ‘the amending 
Regulation’) to provide a comprehensive EU-wide digital identity framework. It applies to 
electronic identification schemes notified to the European Commission (EC) by EU countries, 
to European Digital Identity Wallets (EUDIWs) provided by a Member State as well as to 
trust service providers established in the EU. The aim is to introduce interoperable EUDIWs 
across Member States and to remove the barriers to using electronic identification means 
and trust services in the EU, which were previously based on national legislation and were not 
interoperable.61
Notably, the Regulation requires Member States to provide EUDIWs by the end of 2026.62 The 
issuance, use and revocation of these EUDIWs will be free of charge to all natural persons, 
although their use will not be mandatory. They will enable users to interact with both public 
and private organisations.
While working on the text of the amending Regulation, the EC adopted a Recommendation63 
calling on Member States to work closely with the Commission to develop a common 
Union Toolbox comprising a technical Architecture and Reference Framework (ARF),64 along 
with a set of common standards, technical specifications, guidelines and best practices for 
building the EUDIW ecosystem. The EC has been collaborating with Member States65 and 
other relevant stakeholders to develop the ARF, starting before the entry-into-force of the 
Regulation. The EC has also co-funded large scale EUDIW pilot projects,66 with additional calls 
for pilot projects launched in 2024 and 2025. Furthermore, the Regulation provides for the EC 
to adopt implementing acts67 (not all were adopted at the time of publication of this document) 
detailing the technical specifications and standards mandated for the EUDIW in a phased 
approach. The ARF details the requirements that are laid down in technical specifications and 
in standards, which are then referenced in the implementing regulations. These specifications 
imply the use of existing standards, with proposals for amendments, and the creation of new 
standards developed in collaboration with the European Standardisation Organisations.68 The 
ARF is developed in an open process on GitHub involving the opportunity for any interested 
party to provide feedback and input69.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
26
6.2	
EUDIW wallet ecosystem and features
For the sake of brevity and focus, we will not be able to provide a comprehensive overview of 
the EUDIW ecosystem and the features planned. Please refer to the ARF documentation,70 and 
more specifically Chapter 3.
The EU Digital Identity framework as an identity model and its sources of trust
The EU Digital Identity Framework can be consideredj as having some elements of a ‘distributed 
identity model’, insofar as all Identity Providers (IdPs) satisfying the conditions established 
by the Regulation may issue personal identity data, attributes and credentials. Furthermore, 
since the EU Digital Identity Framework is interoperable and cross-border by design, we could 
consider somehow its model as ‘federated’, since data released by a Member State must be 
trusted by an RP belonging to another Member State, if the use case provides for this.
The framework integrates an EUDIW that enables the concept of a ‘user-centric’ digital identity 
paradigm. It also overall enables many of the original SSI principles.71 At the same time, it 
differs from the central SSI statement that “the user is the ultimate authority on their identity”. 
An explanation follows.
For identity data and certain attributes accessed in use cases requiring a high level of trust, 
for example identification by a law enforcement officer or authorisation to access health or tax 
services, the ultimate source of trust is usually the relevant EU Member State. Through a chain 
of trust ensured by the Regulation’s mandated mechanisms and supervised by its established 
competent authorities, Member States authorise and guarantee the issuance of these identity 
data, attributes and credentials to EUDIW users in a way that relevant Relying Parties (RPs) can 
trust. In these use cases, the EUDIW enables users to control their data without granting them 
ultimate authority.
As to the scope and cross-border acceptance of the EUDIW, Art.5f72 of the Regulation defines 
those RPs and relevant use cases where the EUDIW must be accepted as an identification and 
authentication means. They include:
•	 public sector bodies providing online public services requiring electronic 
identification and authentication;
•	 private companies (except micro and small enterprises), including in the areas 
of transport, energy, banking, financial services, social security, health, drinking 
water, postal services, digital infrastructure, education or telecommunications, 
that are required by law or contract to use strong user authentication for online 
identification;
•	 providers of very large online platforms73 when requiring user authentication to 
access their services.
For other use cases (for instance fidelity cards, club cards or event tickets) it will be possible for 
RPs to rely on the use the EUDIW insofar as the overall eIDAS rules are complied with. It will 
j	
See categorisations in section 2.2.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
27
not be possible to manage self-defined attributes that users might want to create on top of 
the regulated credentials within an EUDIW. Any such applications would need to be managed 
by a different Digital Identity Wallet.
6.3	
The EUDIW and personal data protection 
requirements in the eIDAS Regulation
The European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) has provided formal comments on the original 
EC Proposal to amend the eIDAS Regulation, as well as on different batches of implementing 
acts following respective empowerments of the Regulation. 74 In its remarks the EDPS has 
highlighted that the success of the EU digital identity framework will be measured not only by 
its technical capabilities, but also by its ability to genuinely embed and uphold fundamental 
rights, and specifically data protection. The EDPS has identified the critical junctures in the 
legislative and technical development process at which it is essential to consider data protection 
requirements to avoid risks such as widespread surveillance, the ‘wallet as a honeypot’ threat, 
and the over-sharing of personal data.
In order to mitigate data protection risks, the legislator has included a set of data protection 
requirements into the amended Regulation throughout the legislative process, gaining 
increasing attention and leading to gradual improvement. The EC, which during the legislative 
process had called on representatives from Member States through the comitology instrument75 
to contribute to the EUDIW implementation, has involved other stakeholders, including 
cryptography experts. Together with civil society, these experts first publicly expressed their 
views on what they considered insufficient privacy requirements in the proposed Regulation text, 
and then on what they deemed at that point in time an inadequate practical implementation 
of these requirements in the implementing regulations,76 thus contributing towards better 
results.
Other EU data protection supervisory authorities have also provided feedback on the on-
going EUDIW implementation process and on the EUDIW topic. 77
Data protection related provisions
The eIDAS Regulation aims to establish compliance with the GDPR and a data protection by 
design approach in several of its provisions. Recital 9 of the amending Regulation highlights 
that the proposed framework should comply with the GDPR, explicitly referencing the “data 
minimisation and purpose limitation principle and obligations, such as data protection by 
design and by default”.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
28
As to the privacy by design approach, the Regulation mandates that the technical framework 
of the EUDIW:
•	 not allow providers of electronic attestations of attributes or any other party, 
after the issuance of the attestation of attributes, to obtain data that allows 
transactions or user behaviour to be tracked, linked or correlated, or knowledge 
of transactions or user behaviour to be otherwise obtained, unless explicitly 
authorised by the user;
•	 enable privacy preserving techniques which ensure unlinkability, where the 
attestation of attributes does not require the identification of the user.
Specific legal requirements on the EUDIW and other actors of the EU digital identity framework 
are identified in Section 8.1.
6.4	
Measures to implement data protection 
requirements in the EUDIW
In this section, we describe how and how far the EUDIW provisions and ongoing implementation 
meet data protection requirements and measures, with a focus on those introduced in chapter 5.
Ensuring confidentiality and integrity
The level of security and trustworthiness in the EUDIW and how it interacts with the other actors 
of the EU Digital Identity Framework is defined by the concept of ‘level of assurance’ (LoA). 
This is a term introduced in the eIDAS Regulation that indicates the degree of confidence in a 
person’s claimed identity when using electronic identification.78
The LoAs are classified into three categories: Low, Substantial and High. These categories 
reflect varying degrees of trust and security in the processes of issuing, verifying, authenticating 
and managing identities.
The EUDIW has been designed by the legislator to manage electronic identification to the 
highest security standards. As such, it must comply with High LoA standards to securely store 
and present ‘qualified attributes’, while ensuring resistance to tampering and cyberattacks. 
This also implies that the Wallet Unit, the device hosting the EUDIW, must use a Wallet Secure 
Cryptographic Device (WSCD) to store and manage the cryptographic material used to bind 
the PID and attributes to the Wallet Unit with a High LoA. We have described the integrity 
and confidentiality requirements of DIWs in section 5.1, introducing software and hardware 
features in mobile devices or cloud resources such as Trusted Execution Environments, Secure 
Elements and Hardware Security Modules, which could provide the required strong security 
assurance.79 The WSCD of an EUDIW is to be implemented by adequately integrating these 
resources.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
29
The implementation of selective disclosure of attributes and unlinkability 
requirements
We have seen that implementing selective disclosure of attributes and unlinkability requires 
specific architectural choices for the Digital Identity Wallet (DIW) ecosystem, as well as the use 
of enabling technologies and protocols. In section 5.2 we discussed the use of anonymous 
credentials and the cryptographic algorithms that can support these requirements.
An implementing regulation of the EUDIW80 has established ISO/IEC 18013-5:2021 and ISO/
IEC TS 18013-7:2024 as the reference standards identifying the protocols and interfaces for the 
proximity and remote presentation of EUDIW attributes to RPs. These standards were referred 
to in section 3.4.
Many in industry and academia81 have highlighted how using these standards would prevent 
the development of a comprehensive privacy solution. While they allow selective disclosure, 
which is already used in smartphones and is being deployed in some national digital driving 
licence schemes, they do not meet the unlinkability requirements.82 This is because of the 
information used when presenting the verifiable credentials to the RP. The presence of unique 
identifiers in the hashes of user attributes and the IdP’s signatures enables the tracking of 
multiple transactions with the same RP, as well as further traceability in the event of collusion 
among RPs, and between IdPs and RPs. One possible mitigation measure would be to use 
single-use credentials issued in batches. However, this approach introduces challenges related 
to operational complexity, resource consumption, and credential revocation83.
This is why some researchers and industry practitioners propose using anonymous credentials 
and zero-knowledge proofs to meet the unlinkability requirements, while enabling the use of 
pseudonyms and implementing selective disclosure.
As to revocation related unlinkability, researchers consider it as a hard problem to solve. Some 
believe that an effective methodology to be applied to anonymous credentials could be 
similar to the one adopted in ISO/IEC 18013-5:2021. The idea would be to integrate a deadline 
attribute into a very short validity period, showing the verifier a zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) 
without disclosing any identifiers and thus not enabling any tracking.
So far, the European Commission has not adopted the anonymous credentials and zero-
knowledge proofs solution, reportedly due to limitations regarding its suitability for current 
mobile devices, the immaturity of the technology, and the absence of standards for 
implementing it. However, the EUDIW project has boosted developments within industry 
and standardisation organisations, as we have noted. The European Commission has been 
carrying out a discussion within the ARF regarding privacy risks and mitigations, as well as 
relevant technical challenges and solutions, including on zero-knowledge proofs. The aim is to 
consider a possible future adoption and integration of these solutions into the EUDIW. Within 
the context of the ARF, the Commission is currently exploring different zero-knowledge-proof 
solutions by following closely the progress being made in the community of researchers and 
in the industry on this topic. Furthermore, zero-knowledge proof solutions are currently being 
tested for the purpose of age assurance in the ‘Age Verification App’,84 which is being built to 
the same specifications as the EUDIW. This may also contribute to the further development of 
these technologies and to boost its adoption in the wallet ecosystem.
One topic of discussion between the EC and other stakeholders has been whether to leave 
the integration of anonymous credentials for a second phase of the project or postpone the 
deployment of the EUDIW to start with the right approach. The EUDIW project will have a 
significant impact in the future of identification and authentication in the digital domain. It 
will support an increasing number of aspects of our lives and could have wide consequences 

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
30
on our fundamental rights and freedoms. In our view, it is therefore essential to adopt a fully-
fledged privacy enabling approach from the outset, even if this implies delaying the project. 
Alternatively, the architecture of the EUDIW ecosystem should be designed to enable the 
smooth integration of technologies such as anonymous credentials and zero-knowledge 
proofs as soon as possible.
Other data protection considerations
Implementing selective disclosure may provide the technical means to decide which information 
to show RPs within the same credential, but this alone is insufficient for a holistic privacy-
by-design solution. The technical and governance architecture should allow RPs to request 
only what they are lawfully allowed to request and thus prevent them from ‘over-asking’. The 
legal requirements provide for the obligation for RPs to register what their activities are and 
the information they may request from EUDIW users. However, at the time of writing this 
document, there is no obligation for RPs to show EUDIWs in real time the pieces of information 
they are allowed to request so that the EUDIW user can refuse disclosure; this is merely an 
option for each Member State to decide. Although other measures could mitigate this risk, 
the automated interaction between EUDIWs and RPs, coupled with the absence of effective 
technical controls, could lead to the seamless over-collection of personal data, far beyond the 
levels we see in current transactions. Furthermore, it is essential to be informed by design of 
the use cases where RPs are allowed to request the generation of pseudonyms to link multiple 
transactions, so as to avoid unlawful attempts to profile users. It is also essential to be informed 
by design of all those use cases where identification is required. This is why a solution should 
be designed for RPs to systematically provide EUDIWs with this information in real time.
Furthermore, while the current framework integrates certain technically enabled features, 
it does not mandate a fully-fledged consent management solution within the EUDIW. A 
comprehensive privacy-by-design approach to interactions between EUDIWs and RPs, 
encompassing all necessary features, is highly recommended for inclusion in the reference 
architecture and anyhow expected for compliance with the GDPR in any implementation 
deployed in the EU Member States.
The Regulation, as specified in its implementing acts, provides users of the EUDIW with 
a function that allows them to easily report an RP to the relevant national data protection 
authority if they receive an allegedly unlawful or suspicious request for data (including an 
excessive data access request) from this RP.k A better definition of the main use cases of the 
EUDIW in the different contexts would create a common understanding of the meaning of 
an excessive data access request, which would be beneficial for users and RPs, and ultimately 
enhance trust in the EUDIW. Work in this direction is therefore welcome.85 It will help ensure 
that data protection authorities do not receive an overwhelming number of reports from users 
and will facilitate the harmonised use of the EUDIW across the EU/EEA.
k	
See section 8.1 to this TechDispatch, listing specific EUDIW data protection requirements.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
31
7.	 Conclusion
Digital Identity Wallets are building blocks of future digital identity management solutions 
as well as the identification and authorisation gateways for our digital transactions, which 
support an increasing number of interactions in our everyday lives. The aim of these solutions 
is to provide users with control, security and trust. However, they might also enable tracking 
and profiling by any potential malicious actors. Furthermore, the success of these solutions 
depends not only on their features and functionalities but also on citizens’ trust. This is why a 
data protection by design approach is essential to provide the necessary assurance features 
while avoiding enabling any possible tracking options. This is not straightforward, especially 
when considering the need for large-scale deployment in a real-world context. Nevertheless, 
technological research has made significant progress in reconciling conflicting requirements, 
and standardisation efforts are increasing. Cryptographers have proposed using anonymous 
credentials and cryptographic protocols such as zero-knowledge proofs as the main building 
blocks for a privacy by design and by default solution.
The eIDAS Regulation, which supports the EU Digital Identity Wallet project, refers to a data 
protection by design approach.l A number of implementing acts referencing standards and 
technical specifications have already been adopted.86 The latest version of the Architecture 
and Reference Framework and the respective technical specifications are currently being 
developed and must translate those high-level privacy requirements into detailed features. 
As we have reported, this path is not without obstacles, but ways forward are being proposed.
The European Digital Identity Wallet (EUDIW) plans to give users control over their personal 
data and prevent unnecessary processing and disclosure of personal data, tracking of users’ 
online interactions, and user profiling.
In the recent past, we have witnessed how remedying a privacy-unaware evolution of the internet 
in the aftermath of its construction, which has allowed widespread tracking and profiling, is a 
daunting task. We believe that the EUDIW project will play a crucial role in people’s future 
digital interactions and personal lives. A comprehensive and coherent ‘data protection by 
design and by default’ approach, from the conception to the roll-out, is therefore essential to 
prevent any unfair and unlawful use of this instrument.
l	
See section 8.1 to this TechDispatch.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
32
8.	 APPENDIX
8.1	
Specific EUDIW data protection requirements
These are some of the specific data protection requirements provided by the eIDAS Regulation 
(see Art. 5, 5(a-f)):
•	 all parties involved in the EUDIW ecosystem to implement appropriate and effective data 
protection measures and be able to demonstrate compliance with the GDPR;
•	 providers of EUDIWs to:
•	 collect only personal data necessary for the provision of the wallet, nor combine personal 
data relating to the wallet with personal data relating to other services or third parties, 
unless necessary for the provision of the wallet, unless the wallet user requested it;
•	 keep personal data relating to the EUDIW logically separated from any other data;
•	 providers of electronic attestation of attributes to:
•	 not combine personal data relating to the provision of electronic attestations of 
attributes with personal data relating to other services or third parties;
•	 keep personal data relating to the provision of electronic attestations of attributes 
logically separated from any other data;
•	 implement the provision of those attributes in a way that is functionally separated from 
other services provided;
•	 EUDIW to:
•	 ensure selective disclosure of attributes towards RPs, as specified in section 4.2;
•	 be able to generate pseudonyms (see section 4.3 for the rationale of pseudonyms) and 
stored them encrypted in the wallet;
•	 not provide any information to providers of electronic attestations of attributes about 
the use of those electronic attestations;
•	 implement security by design and be provided with a High LoA;
•	 undergo certification of conformity assessment by designated bodies as to many 
obligations and cybersecurity requirements;

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
33
•	 EUDIW to provide the user with full control of its use and data, also by:
•	 providing a dashboard with a view on all wallets transactions, RPs that have interacted 
with the wallet and data exchanged with them;
•	 enabling the user to easily request for erasure of personal data to a RP;
•	 easily reporting a RP to the GDPR competent authorities if an allegedly unlawful or 
suspicious request for data is received;
•	 enabling data portability;
•	 RPs to
•	 register in the Member States where established; the registration shall be publicly 
available in electronic format;
•	 include in the registration information the intended use of EUDIW, including an 
indication of the data to be requested by the RP from users;
•	 not request users to provide any data other than that indicated;
•	 not refuse the use of pseudonyms, where the identification of the user is not required 
by Union or national law.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
34
8.2	
Main references
1.	 Podgorelec, 
B., 
Alber, 
L., 
Zefferer, 
T. 
(2022). 
What 
is 
a 
(Digital) 
Identity 
Wallet? 
A 
systematic 
literature 
review. 
2022 
IEEE 
46th 
Annual 
Computers, 
Software, 
and 
Applications 
Conference 
(COMPSAC), 
809–818.
https://doi.org/10.1109/compsac54236.2022.00131.
2.	 Ebadi Ansaroudi, Z.E., Carbone, R., Sciarretta, G., Ranise, S. (2023). Control 
is Nothing Without Trust a  First Look into  Digital Identity Wallet Trends. In: 
Atluri, V., Ferrara, A.L. (eds) Data and Applications Security and Privacy XXXVII. 
DBSec 2023. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 13942. Springer, Cham.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-37586-6_7. 
3.	 Slamanig, D. (2025). Privacy-Preserving Authentication: Theory vs. Practice. https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2501.07209
4.	 Babel, 
M., 
& 
Sedlmeir, 
J. 
(2023). 
Bringing 
data 
minimization 
to 
digital 
wallets 
at 
scale 
with 
general-purpose 
zero-knowledge 
proofs.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.00823.
5.	 Mazzocca, C., Acar, A., Uluagac, S., Montanari, R., Bellavista, P., & Conti, M. (2025). A survey on 
decentralized identifiers and verifiable credentials. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.02455.
6.	 Abraham, A. (2022). Qualified Self-Sovereign Identity: Addressing the gaps between Self-
Sovereign Identity and traditional Identity Systems. 10.13140/RG.2.2.29266.22728.
7.	 Ebadi Ansaroudi, Z., Sciarretta, G., De Maria, A. et al. (2025). Navigating secure storage 
requirements for EUDI Wallets: a review paper. EURASIP J. on Info. Security 2025, 2. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13635-025-00187-6
8.	 Flamini, A., Sciarretta, G., Scuro, M., Sharif, A., Tomasi, A., & Ranise, S. (2024). On 
Cryptographic Mechanisms for the Selective Disclosure of Verifiable Credentials.  ArXiv, 
abs/2401.08196
9.	 Bećirović Ramić, Š., Cogo, E., Prazina, I., Cogo, E., Turkanović, M., Mulahasanović, R. T., & 
Mrdović, S. (2024). Selective disclosure in digital credentials: A review. ICT Express, 10(4), 
916–934., https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icte.2024.05.011
10.	Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 
2014 on electronic identification and trust services for electronic transactions in the internal 
market and repealing Directive 1999/93/EC (OJ L 257, 28.8.2014, p. 73), http://data.europa.
eu/eli/reg/2014/910/oj
11.	Joint statement of scientists and NGOs on the EU’s proposed eIDAS reform – 2 November 
2023
12.	C. Baum et al. (2024), Cryptographers-feedback on ARF v.1.4.0
13.	European Digital Identity Wallet Architecture and Reference Framework
14.	ETSI TR 119 476 v1.3.1 (2025-08). Technical Report. Electronic Signatures and Trust 
Infrastructures (ESI); Selective disclosure and zero-knowledge proofs applied to Electronic 
Attestation of Attributes; Part 1: Feasibility study

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
35
Endnotes
1	
See A. Flamini (2024): “Verifiable credentials are a digital analogue of physical credentials. Their authenticity and 
integrity are protected by means of cryptographic techniques, and they can be presented to verifiers to reveal 
attributes or even predicates about the attributes included in the credential.” See also section 2.1 for a more 
specific explanation of the term ‘verifier’. A predicate is a statement about the values of attributes. For example, 
from a date of birth as an attribute, it is possible to create a predicate to state the belonging to a specific age 
range.
2	
For more info on PIMS, see for example the European Data Protection Supervisor Opinion on Personal 
Information Management Systems, 20 October 2016, available at: https://www.edps.europa.eu/data-protection/
our-work/publications/opinions/personal-information-management-systems_en
3	
See for example the Italian ‘Sistema IT-Wallet project’, which already encompasses as a starting point the digital 
driving licence, the European Health Insurance Card and the European Disability Card; or the Belgian MyGov.be, 
a solution by the Belgian Federal Government deployed in May 2024, which will soon integrate documents such 
as the identity card, the mobile driving licence and the European Health Insurance Card. Other projects come 
from the private sector, such as the current itsme® app, used by 90% of Belgian adult residents to authenticate 
to public and private services, developed by a consortium of Belgian banks and telecom operators, and officially 
recognised at the highest assurance level under eIDAS.
4	
See for example the Singapore’s Singpass: https://www.tech.gov.sg/products-and-services/for-citizens/digital-
services/singpass/
5	
See, as examples, https://trinsic.id/platform/, or https://trustcloud.tech/blog/top-10-identity-wallets-i/ https://www.
talao.io/ or https://www.1kosmos.com/
6	
Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 2014 on electronic 
identification and trust services for electronic transactions in the internal market and repealing Directive 1999/93/
EC, as amended by Regulation (EU) 2024/1183 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 April 2024 
amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 as regards establishing the European Digital Identity Framework. 
Consolidated text: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2014/910/2024-10-18
7	
Thank you to Vecteezy for the icons used.
8	
Examples of such IdPs include Google Identity (https://developers.google.com/identity), Sign In with Apple 
(https://support.apple.com/en-us/102609), Facebook Login (https://developers.facebook.com/docs/facebook-
login/#-facebook-login-)
9	
The SSI paradigm is often used interchangeably with the concept of distributed identity management. In itself, 
distributed identity management might simply mean that the sources of trust defining a user identity (and thus 
their identity attributes and credentials) may be multiple and not necessarily a single centralised entity.
10	 Christopher Allen introduced the term “Self-Sovereign Identity” in a blog post, marking the formal emergence 
of the concept: The Path to Self-Sovereign Identity, 2016. The article provides also a concise and clear history of 
the evolution of digital identity models up to the SSI. Available online at: https://www.lifewithalacrity.com/article/
the-path-to-self-soverereign-identity/,
11	 For instance, the EU has co-financed the eSSIF-Lab project, “aimed at advancing the broad uptake of Self-
Sovereign Identities (SSI) as a next generation, open and trusted digital identity solution for faster and safer 
electronic transactions via the Internet and in real life”. Subgrantee projects are listed in this booklet: https://
essif-lab.eu/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/essif-booklet-23.pdf
12	 For a discussion on blockchain and its mechanisms of trust see also Becker, M., & Bodó, B. (2021). Trust in 
blockchain-based systems. Internet Policy Review, 10(2). https://doi.org/10.14763/2021.2.1555
13	 https://www.giac.org/paper/gsec/625/trust-model-pgp-x509-standard-pki/101441
14	 See e.g. Abraham, A. (2022). The same “web of trust”, for example, somehow leverages e-mail addresses, which 
ultimately depend on centralised roots of trust.
15	 See e.g. Podgorelec et al. (2002), Ebadi Ansaroudi Z. et al. (2023).
16	 See e.g. https://passkit.com/digital-student-id-card/
17	 See B. Podgorelec at al. (2022); Ebadi Ansaroudi Z. et al. (2023). For commercial products, see e.g. https://
trustcloud.tech/blog/top-10-identity-wallets-i/ and https://trustcloud.tech/blog/top-10-identity-wallets-ii/
18	 Near-field communication (NFC) is a set of communication protocols that enables communication between two 
electronic devices over a distance of 4 cm or less. See e.g.: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Near-field_communication 
or https://nfc-forum.org/learn/nfc-technology/.
19	 A permissioned blockchain is a type of blockchain managed by an organisation, which decides on its governance 
(participations and rules, including access control). It differentiates from the permissionless blockchain, a public 
infrastructure open to everyone where transactions are executed and verified by a decentralised group of 
participants and publicly visible.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
36
20	 A digital signature is a secure cryptographic method of validating the authenticity and integrity of digital files 
(e.g. messages or documents). In other words, its purpose is to demonstrate that a document reliably originates 
from the person or organisation that claims its origin (“authenticity”) or provide evidence that it originates from 
that person despite they claim it does not (“non-repudiation”) and that the document was not modified or 
tampered with after the originator has signed that document (“integrity”).
21	 See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public-key_cryptography or U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST), “Digital Signature Standard (DSS),” FIPS PUB 186-4, July 2013
22	 See Ebadi Ansaroudi, Z. (2023).
23	 See e.g. https://www.iso.org/standard/69084.html. Several U.S. states have begun issuing mobile driving licences 
that comply with ISO/IEC 18013-5 and many others have piloted them. Notably, Louisiana and Colorado claim 
to be the first to deploy an ISO/IEC 18013-5-compliant mobile driving licence (mDL). The U.S. Transportation 
Security Administration (TSA) has begun accepting ISO/IEC 18013-5-compliant mDLs at select airport security 
checkpoints, allowing travellers to present their digital licenses for identity verification. In Europe, the standard 
has been adopted for the European Digital Identity Wallet, as described in chapter 5.
24	 https://www.w3.org/press-releases/2022/did-rec/. From the source “This new type of verifiable identifier, which 
does not require a centralized registry, will enable both individuals and organizations to take greater control of 
their online information and relationships while also providing greater security and privacy”
25	 https://www.w3.org/TR/2025/PR-vc-data-model-2.0-20250320/
26	 https://www.w3.org/news/2025/seven-proposed-recommendations-published-by-the-verifiable-credentials-working-
group/
27	 Article 5(1)(f) of the GDPR.
28	 Article 5(1)(c) of the GDPR.
29	 Marsman, Henk & Bharosa, Nitesh & Klenk, Michael & Reuver, Mark. (2024). How does the EU Digital Identity 
Wallet change the risk of over-sharing data? A Dutch perspective. https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-3737/paper41.pdf
30	 See Bećirović Ramić, Š. et al. (2024)
31	 See Slamanig, D. (2025) and Baum C. et al. (2024)
32	 See: Ebadi Ansaroudi et al. (2025) (in particular for the secure storage requirements for EUDIW). See also e.g. 
Bove, D. (2023). A Large-Scale Study on the Prevalence and Usage of TEE-based Features on Android. ARES: 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.10511
33	 Such as ARM TrustZone or Intel SGX.
34	 A hardened server is a server that has been specifically configured and secured to minimise its vulnerability 
to cyberattacks and unauthorised access. The process of server hardening involves implementing a range of 
security measures across the server’s hardware, firmware, operating system, and applications to reduce its 
“attack surface”—the total number of potential points where an attacker could try to gain access or exploit 
vulnerabilities;
35	 See Babel, M., & Sedlmeir, J. (2023)
36	 See e.g. Liu, W., Chen, H., Wang, X., Li, Z., Zhang, D., Wang, W., & Tang, H. (2021). Understanding TEE Containers, 
Easy to Use, Hard to Trust. ArXiv, abs/2109.01923.
37	 David Chaum. “SecurityWithout Identification: Transaction Systems to Make Big Brother Obsolete”. In: Commun. 
ACM 28.10 (1985), pp. 1030–1044. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/4372.4373.
38	 Selective disclosure is supported also by techniques other than anonymous credentials. For example ISO/IEC 
18013-5. See Flamini A. et al. (2024). See also section 3.4
39	 See Article 4(1) and Recital 26 GDPR for the definition of personal data, as well as the Guidelines of the European 
Data Protection Board and the case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Union
40	 See: https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/computer-science/cryptographic-primitive. Among those primitives we 
can mention: cryptographic hashes, digital signatures, secret sharing and zero-knowledge proofs.
41	 We will draw inspiration mainly from the concept and language used by Slamanig, D. (2025)
42	 The issuer-hiding feature enhances privacy by preventing verifiers from linking credentials to specific organisations 
or inferring sensitive information. For example, a patient proves insurance eligibility for mental health treatment 
without revealing the insurer’s identity. This avoids stigma or discrimination tied to specific insurers known for 
covering sensitive conditions.
43	 Quoting Babel, M., & Sedlmeir, J. (2023): “ZKPs are defined as “those proofs that convey no additional knowledge 
other than the correctness of the proposition in question” (Goldwasser et al., 1989). They build on proofs that 
ensure “soundness” – a guarantee for the verifier that the prover’s statement is indeed correct – with high 
probability and not with certainty as in common mathematical proofs (Evans and Angeris, 2023).”
44	 Camenisch, J., Lysyanskaya, A., (2001). An efficient system for non-transferable anonymous credentials with 
optional anonymity revocation, in: International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic 
Techniques, Springer, 2001, pp. 93–118. doi:10.1007/3-540-44987-6_7.

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
37
45	 Boneh, D., Boyen, X. (2004). Short signatures without random oracles, in: International Conference on the Theory 
and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Springer, 2004, pp. 56–73. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-24676-3_4. See 
also the latest working document of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) on BBS Signature Scheme.
46	 Johnson, D., Menezes, A. & Vanstone, S., (2001). The Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA). IJIS 1, 
36–63 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1007/s102070100002 .
47	 See Babel, M., & Sedlmeir, J. (2023) for an extensive presentation of the topic in the anonymous credentials 
context.
48	 See recent implementations of anonymous credentials from Google researchers: https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/2010 
and from Microsoft researchers: https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/2013 or again Babel, M., & Sedlmeir, J. (2023)
49	 See Slamanig, D. (2025) and Babel, M., & Sedlmeir, J. (2023).
50	 Single-use anonymous credentials aim at avoiding linkability among different uses but are not friendly to use in 
a real-world scenario where many presentations of the same credentials to RPs take place. Multi-use ones have 
been developed with unlinkability by design and efficient versions have been developed for deployment.
51	 Camenisch J., Van Herreweghen E. (2002). “Design and implementation of the idemix anonymous credential 
system”. In: Proceedings of the 9th ACMConference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS 2002, 
Washington, DC, USA, November 18-22, 2002. Ed. by Vijayalakshmi Atluri. ACM, 2002, pp. 21–30. URL: https://
doi.org/10.1145/586110.586114.
52	 See Slamanig, D. (2025), Babel, M., & Sedlmeir, J. (2023), Flamini A. et al. (2024).
53	 See also Lueks W. et al. (2017). “Fast revocation of attribute-based credentials for both users and verifiers”. In: 
Computers & Security 67 (June 2017), pp. 308–323. issn: 01674048. doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2016.11.018, or Baldimtsi F. 
et al. 2017). “Accumulators with Applications to Anonymity-Preserving Revocation”. In: 2017 IEEE European 
Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P). Paris: IEEE, Apr. 2017, pp. 301–315. isbn: 978-1-5090-5762-7. doi: 
10.1109/EuroSP.2017.13.
54	 See Slamanig, D. (2025), C. Baum et al. (2024)
55	 NIST Workshop on Privacy-Enhancing Cryptography 2024 - BBS# and eIDAS 2.0 - Making BBS Anonymous 
Credentials 
eIDAS 
2.0 
Compliant: 
https://csrc.nist.gov/Presentations/2024/3b3-making-bbs-anonymous-
credentials-eidas-20-comp
56	 Babel, M., & Sedlmeir, J. (2023)
57	 Chathurangi, M., Li, Q., & Foo, E. (2025). On Advances of Anonymous Credentials—From Traditional to Post-
Quantum. Cryptography, 9(1), 8. https://doi.org/10.3390/cryptography9010008
58	 See Flamini A. et al. (2024) and its conclusions
59	 ETSI TR 119 476 v1.3.1 (2025-08). The technical report, produced by ETSI Technical Committee Electronic Signatures 
and Trust Infrastructures (ESI), is part 1 of a multi-part deliverable covering policy and security requirements for 
selective disclosure and zero-knowledge proofs applied to Electronic Attestation of Attributes, and should be 
followed by other two parts, namely on the ‘Implementation in the EUDI Wallet’ and on the ‘EUDI Wallet Unit 
Attestation’
60	 See endnote 6. See also https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/LSU/?uri=CELEX:02014R0910-20241018 for a 
short explanation.
61	 Article 3 of the Regulation, as amended, defines all the terms just used
62	 See 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:32024R1183, 
as 
well 
as 
https://eur-lex.
europa.eu/legal-content/EN/LSU/?uri=celex:32024R1183 for a short explanation. See 	
also 
EUDIW 
project 
EC’s 
webpage: 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-building-blocks/sites/display/EUDIGITALIDENTITYWALLET/
EU+Digital+Identity+Wallet+Home
63	 COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION (EU) 2021/946 of 3 June 2021 on a Common Union Toolbox for a coordinated 
approach towards a European Digital Identity Framework, OJ L 210/51, 14.6.2021
64	 See https://github.com/eu-digital-identity-wallet/eudi-doc-architecture-and-reference-framework/blob/main/docs/
architecture-and-reference-framework-main.md
65	 This group of experts is called European Digital Identity Cooperation Group. See: https://digital-strategy.
ec.europa.eu/en/policies/european-digital-identity-cooperation-group
66	 See 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-building-blocks/sites/display/EUDIGITALIDENTITYWALLET/
What+are+the+Large+Scale+Pilot+Projects
67	 All adopted implementing acts can be found here https://ec.europa.eu/digital-building-blocks/sites/spaces/
EUDIGITALIDENTITYWALLET/pages/915931811/The+European+Digital+Identity+Regulation?filters=adopted&all=
1#sec-6-regulations .
68	 See https://www.cencenelec.eu/european-standardization/

EDPS TechDispatch on Digital Identity Wallets
38
69	 See 
https://github.com/eu-digital-identity-wallet/eudi-doc-architecture-and-reference-framework/blob/main/
docs/discussion-topics/README.md for Discussion Topics, https://github.com/eu-digital-identity-wallet/eudi-
doc-standards-and-technical-specifications/blob/main/docs/technical-specifications/README.md 
for 
Technical 
Specifications and https://github.com/eu-digital-identity-wallet/eudi-doc-standards-and-technical-specifications for 
the Standards and Technical Specification repository and roadmap.
70	 See endnote 64
71	 See endnote 10
72	 More specifically Art.5f (1), (2) and (3) of the Regulation.
73	 Very large online platforms are those referred to in Article 33 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2065
74	 See 
https://www.edps.europa.eu/system/files/2021-07/21-07-28_formal_comments_2021-0598_d-1609_european_
digital_identity_en.pdf as EDPS formal comments for the eIDAS Regulation. Formal comments on the 
implementing regulations can be found within the specific section of the EDPS website: https://www.edps.
europa.eu/data-protection/our-work/our-work-by-type/formal-comments_en. See also the EDPS speech at the 
Cybersecurity Standardisation Conference 2023: https://www.edps.europa.eu/system/files/2023-02/23-02-07_ww-
enisa_en_2.pdf
75 	 See 
https://commission.europa.eu/law/law-making-process/adopting-eu-law/implementing-and-delegated-acts/
comitology_en.
76	 See e.g.: https://www.beuc.eu/sites/default/files/publications/beuc-x-2022-016_eidas_position_paper.pdf on the 
EC proposal, Joint statement of scientists and NGOs on the EU’s proposed eIDAS reform – 2 November 2023; 
Cryptographers-feedback on ARF v.1.4.0 , C. Baum et al. - June 2024; feedback from epicenter.works.
77	 For example, the French (CNIL) and the Spanish (AEPD) competent data protection authorities. The AEPD has 
published useful blog posts on the EUDIW topic. So far: 1) https://www.aepd.es/en/press-and-communication/
blog/eidas2-the-eudi-wallet-and-the-gdpr-i; 2) https://www.aepd.es/en/press-and-communication/blog/eidas2-the-
eudi-wallet-and-the-gdpr-ii; 3) https://www.aepd.es/en/prensa-y-comunicacion/blog/eidas2-la-cartera-europea-de-
identidad-digital-y-el-rgpd-iii.
78	 See https://ec.europa.eu/digital-building-blocks/sites/display/DIGITAL/eIDAS+Levels+of+Assurance
79	 Ebadi Ansaroudi, Z. et al. (2025) researches what available secure storage technologies may meet the EUDIW 
requirements.
80	 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/2982 of 28 November 2024 laying down rules for the application 
of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards protocols and interfaces 
to be supported by the European Digital Identity Framework - http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2024/2982/oj
81	 See for example C. Baum et al. (2024).
82	 See e.g. ETSI TR 119 476 v1.3.1 (2025-08) (more info in endnote lvi), in particular its conclusions, in Chapter 10.
83	 The subject has been partially discussed in the context of the ARF in Discussion topic B. See also A. Lysyanskaya, 
Anonymous Credentials and the EUDI Wallet, NIST Workshop on Privacy-Enhancing Cryptography 2024, https://
csrc.nist.gov/csrc/media/presentations/2024/wpec2024-3b5/images-media/wpec2024-3b5-slides-anna--anon-cred-
EUDI.pdf
84	 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/news/commission-releases-enhanced-second-version-age-verification-
blueprint
85	 See EDPS Formal comments on the draft Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) laying down rules for the 
application of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council, as regards the integrity 
and core functionalities of European Digital Identity Wallets, issued on 30 September 2024: “to adequately 
address this issue [over-asking], further work may also be necessary to develop harmonised specifications of 
data elements which are appropriate for certain intended use(s) (use-case(s)). The definition of the permissible 
attribute requests could not only address the legal certainty and interoperability issues, but also enhance user’s 
control on their data and mitigate risks of ‘request fatigue’.”
86	 See endnote 67.

This publication is a brief report produced by the Technology and Privacy Unit of the European 
Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS).
It aims to provide a factual description of an emerging technology and discuss its possible 
impacts on privacy and the protection of personal data. The contents of this publication do not 
imply a policy position of the EDPS.
Author: Massimo Attoresi
Editors: Luis Velasco, Massimo Attoresi, Xabier Lareo
Contact: techmonitoring@edps.europa.eu
To subscribe or unsubscribe to TechDispatch publications, please send a mail to
techmonitoring@edps.europa.eu.
The data protection notice is online on the EDPS website.
© European Union, 2025. Except otherwise noted, the reuse of this document is authorised 
under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). This means that 
reuse is allowed provided appropriate credit is given and any changes made are indicated.
For any use or reproduction of photos or other material that is not owned by the European 
Union, permission must be sought directly from the copyright holders.

edps.europa.eu
