Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

© 2026 The World Bank 
1818 H Street NW, Washington DC 20433 
Telephone: +1-202-473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org
Some rights reserved.
This work is a product of The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy, completeness, or currency of the data included in this work and does not 
assume responsibility for any errors, omissions, or discrepancies in the information, or liability with respect to the use of or 
failure to use the information, methods, processes, or conclusions set forth. The boundaries, colors, denominations, links/
footnotes and other information shown in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the 
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. The citation of works authored by others 
does not mean the World Bank endorses the views expressed by those authors or the content of their works.
Nothing herein shall constitute or be construed or considered to be a limitation upon or waiver of the privileges and immunities 
of The World Bank, all of which are specifically reserved.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, 
this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given. 
Attribution – Please cite the work as follows: “World Bank. 2026. Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm – Convergence of User-Centric 
Digital Identity, Data Sharing and Payments. Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1. © World Bank.”
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications,  
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: +1-202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
Cover Design: Sergio Moreno, World Bank Group
Photographs pages 5, 11, and 55: © Jonathan Marskell / World Bank. Further permission required for reuse.

DIGITAL WALLET POLICY NOTE SERIES, NO. 1
Digital Wallets:
A New Paradigm
Convergence of User-Centric Digital 
Identity, Data Sharing and Payments

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
IV
About Us
This publication is developed by the Digital & AI Vice Presidency, WBG, with 
the support of the Digital Public Infrastructure & Services Umbrella Multi-Donor 
Trust Fund (DPI TF). 
Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) refers to the foundational digital building 
blocks—such as digital identity, data sharing, and digital payments—that enable 
governments and economies to deliver services at scale. 
DPI & Services TF aims to increase the adoption and productive use of safe, 
inclusive, and interoperable digital building blocks and digitally enabled 
services. Operating as a One-World Bank effort, it mobilizes expertise across 
digital transformation, social protection, health, financial inclusion, agriculture, 
governance, and education among others; and collaborates closely with Project 
FASTT on fast payment systems. 
The DPI & Services TF is based on three pillars:  
•	 Knowledge: generating evidence and translating standards into practical 
tools; 
•	 Action: supporting country-level DPI strategies, safe and inclusive 
building blocks, and sectoral digital transformation; and  
•	 Convening: strengthening the global DPI community through peer 
learning, standards alignment, and digital public goods. 
The work supported by the DPI TF is anchored in cross-cutting commitments 
to inclusion and gender equity, human-centric design, reusability through digital 
public goods, safeguards, data protection, and evidence-based implementation. 
Building on the foundations laid by the ID4D-G2Px MDTF (2016-2026), the DPI 
TF is structured around three workstreams: 
•	 The Identification for Development (ID4D) Initiative helps countries 
realize the transformational potential of identification systems for 
the Sustainable Development Goals, from foundational ID and civil 
registration to next-generation digital identity and trust services. Its 
mission is to enable all people to access services and exercise their 
rights by improving the inclusivity, design, and governance of ID and 
trust service ecosystems. Learn more at id4d.worldbank.org.   

V
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
•	 The Digital Government-to-Person Payments (G2Px) Initiative 
transforms G2P payments to accelerate financial inclusion, women’s 
economic empowerment, resilience, and government efficiency. It helps 
countries modernize their G2P ecosystems through recipient-centric 
frameworks and evidence-based guidance on sustainable, inclusive 
models. Learn more at www.worldbank.org/g2px.  
•	 The Data Sharing workstream enables secure, interoperable, and 
privacy-respecting data sharing across sectors at national scale, 
advancing high-value use cases and inclusive benefits. 
Our work is made possible thanks to the generous support of the Gates 
Foundation, UK International Development, French Government, Norwegian 
Agency for Development Cooperation, and Omidyar Network.
Acknowledgments
This policy note was authored by Christopher Tullis, Adam Cooper and David 
Black, under the leadership of Stela Mocan. Excellent feedback and input were 
provided throughout the development of this policy note. The authors are 
indebted to invaluable comments from expert peer reviewers: Julia Clark, Nay 
Constantine, Guillermo Galicia Rabadan, Jonathan Marskell, and Tiago Peixoto. 
The authors would also like to thank the following individuals for their various 
contributions: Audrey Ariss, Marie Eichholtzer, Victoria Esquivel-Korsiak, Daria 
Lavrentieva, Viky Manaila, Slavina Pancheva, Sintia Radu, and Goran Vranic.

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
VI
Contents
Executive Summary....................................................................................2
Introduction.................................................................................................6
Motivation..............................................................................................................7
Purpose and scope............................................................................................10
How do wallets work?................................................................................ 12
Wallets and apps ................................................................................................13
Architecture..........................................................................................................14
Components........................................................................................................15
Scope .................................................................................................................. 20
What is new with wallets?.........................................................................22
Data sharing.........................................................................................................25
Digital identity......................................................................................................31
Electronic signatures..........................................................................................37
Payments............................................................................................................. 40
Risks and challenges .................................................................................48
Challenges.......................................................................................................... 49
Risks..................................................................................................................... 50
Future Trends......................................................................................................51
Conclusion..................................................................................................52
Annex..........................................................................................................56
Credential and Payment Wallets......................................................................57

VII
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
Figures
Figure 1. 	
Ukraine’s Diia “State in a Smartphone” presenting a 
driving license for verification...........................................................................8
Figure 2. 	
Illustration of past and current digital identity, data sharing, 
payment and wallet systems.............................................................................9
Figure 3. 	
Illustrative data model for verifiable credential wallets................................ 16
Figure 4. 	
Scope of key sub-systems in a digital wallet architecture......................... 21
Figure 5. 	
Using a digital wallet to access services in person 
(indicative transaction flow) .............................................................................24
Figure 6. 	
Data sharing through bilateral arrangements  ..............................................26
Figure 7. 	
Using digital wallets to access services online 
(indicative transaction flow) .............................................................................29
Figure 8. 	
User-centric data sharing using digital wallets.............................................30
Figure 9. 	
Traditional digital identity paradigm ...............................................................32
Figure 10.	
 Wallet-based digital identity paradigm .........................................................35
Figure 11.	
 Apple Wallet user interface ............................................................................58
Figure 12. 	
Apple Wallet data flows for payments and credentials ..............................59
Tables
Table 1. 	
Overview of key functional roles in a wallet ecosystem............................. 17
Table 2. 	
Roles and responsibilities for implementing traditional digital identity.....33
Table 3. 	
Roles and responsibilities for implementing digital identity wallets..........36
Table 4. 	
Traditional and wallet-based digital identity paradigms compared..........37
Table 5. 	
Data models and flows for payment and credential wallets compared...60
Boxes
Box 1. 	
Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)......................................................................... 19


1
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
Acronyms
 
 
AI
Artificial Intelligence
API
Application Programming 
Interface
ARF
Architecture and Reference 
Framework
CBDC
Central Bank Digital Currency
DAN
Device Account Number
DPI
Digital Public Infrastructure
eID
Electronic Identity
EMV
Europay, Mastercard, 
and Visa
EU
European Union
EUDI
European Union Digital 
Identity
IdP
Identity Provider
ISO/IEC
International Organization for 
Standardization / International 
Electrotechnical Commission
KYC
Know Your Customer
LSP
Large Scale Pilot
mDL
Mobile Driver’s License
OID4VCI
OpenID for Verifiable 
Credential Issuance
 
 
OID4VP
OpenID for Verifiable 
Presentations
PIN
Personal Identification 
Number
PKI
Public Key Infrastructure
POS
Point-of-Sale
PSP
Payment Service Provider
SCA
Strong Customer 
Authentication
SD-JWT
Selective Disclosure JSON 
Web Token
SEPA
Single Euro Payments Area
SIM
Subscriber Identity Module
SMS
Short Message Service
SWIFT
Society for Worldwide 
Interbank Financial 
Telecommunication
UAE
United Arab Emirates
UNCITRAL United Nations Commission 
on International Trade Law
UPI
Unified Payments Interface
VC
Verifiable Credential
W3C
World Wide Web Consortium

Executive 
Summary

3
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
D
igital wallets enable a move from siloed, tightly coupled systems 
toward modular, user-centric, and standards-based architectures. 
Traditional digital ID approaches bind identity attributes and 
authentication mechanisms into a single solution, leaving other 
data relevant for service delivery to be shared through other channels. Digital 
wallets combine digital ID functions with reusable verifiable credentials held and 
controlled by the user. This decoupling enables new flexibility: credentials can 
be issued by many authoritative entities, stored securely in interoperable wallets, 
and selectively disclosed to a wide range of service providers without requiring 
bespoke integrations or unnecessary data sharing.
Digital wallets mark a paradigm shift in how digital public infrastructure (DPI) 
like digital identity, data sharing, electronic signatures, and payments can be 
organized. In earlier generations, each of these domains evolved in its own 
silo: digital ID systems tightly coupled identity attributes and authentication 
mechanisms; data sharing relied on point-to-point integrations between backend 
systems; electronic signatures often depended on specialized devices and 
readers; and the mechanisms used to authorize payments ran on completely 
parallel infrastructure. Although all of these solutions have been critical to 
growing the digital economy to where it is today, they nonetheless had a number 
of limitations. In many cases, previous generations of digital ID, data sharing and 
electronic signature infrastructure were difficult to use, hard to scale, and they 
were rarely fully integrated into the channels that people actually used to access 
services. 
Lessons from these earlier approaches, combined with the widespread 
availability of smartphones and the emergence of a new set of open standards, 
have enabled the emergence of a new paradigm based on digital wallets. Digital 
wallets allow identity and other credentials to be issued by the institutions that 
already manage them in the real world, while providing a common, interoperable 
environment where those credentials can be stored, combined, and used 
alongside signing and payment-related functions in smoother, end-to-end 
workflows.
This note explains the wallet paradigm from first principles: how wallets work, 
what is new about them, and why they matter. It describes how verifiable 
credentials, common trust infrastructure, and open standards unlock a new 
frontier in scalability and interoperability. Wallet-based credentials can be 
stored in a decentralized manner under the user’s control, mixed and matched 
according to the needs of a use case, and selectively disclosed to protect users’ 
privacy. The paper discusses how the applications used to access wallets can 

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
4
be extended to integrate complementary functions such as electronic signing 
and payment authorization, offering an end-to-end user experience that reduces 
friction for both users and service providers and makes it easier to embed trust 
into everyday digital interactions.
At the same time, wallets introduce new design choices, liabilities, and risks that 
must be managed carefully. Modular ecosystems inherently require additional 
orchestration between actors that is not needed with traditional monolithic 
solutions. Digital wallet ecosystems mobilize a variety of actors, including 
credential issuers, wallet providers, credential verifiers, and trust service 
providers, whose roles and responsibilities must be clearly defined. Robust 
approaches are needed for credential revocation, inclusive access for people 
without smartphones or with limited digital skills, and user-experience challenges 
such as consent fatigue.
Overall, this note provides the conceptual foundation for the Digital Wallet Policy 
Note Series. It argues that digital wallets complement existing digital identity and 
data-sharing approaches, offering a scalable and interoperable infrastructure 
upon which future capabilities can be built. By placing users at the center of 
data-sharing decisions, grounding trust in cryptographic verification, and 
aligning implementation to emerging global standards, digital wallets provide a 
powerful platform for modernizing service delivery and enabling more secure, 
privacy-preserving interactions across the digital economy.

5
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm

Introduction

7
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
Motivation
Digital wallets in the general sense have existed for some time. For over a 
decade now, smartphone users have been able to rely on Apple, Samsung, and 
Google wallets to hold plane tickets, event invitations, store-card vouchers, and 
to present them with QR codes for verification. Payment wallets such as Apple 
Pay now allow individuals to perform what feels like “magic” by paying simply by 
touching a phone or smartwatch to a terminal, without a physical card, chip, or 
PIN. Person-to-person payment apps and mobile-money solutions have been 
profoundly transformative, bringing similar convenience without requiring a 
high-end smartphone or reliable internet access.
For personal data sharing, there are various examples of personal data stores 
where documents can be held securely online, such as India’s DigiLocker, which, 
as of 2024, had over 434 million registered users, allowing them to manage 
over 9 billion documents.1 Digital identity has seen similar leaps. Long gone are 
the days of having to download special software to connect a national ID card 
to a USB port. Recently, digital identity apps have become so advanced and 
so seamlessly integrated with service delivery that countries like Singapore, 
Ukraine, Brazil, and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) can credibly claim to have 
put “the State in a smartphone.”2 
Despite all these successes, thus far this progress in digital identity, payments, 
and data sharing has largely taken place in silos. Each domain has followed 
its own technological and institutional trajectory to solve a specific problem. 
Interoperability has largely been non-existent, in part due to the unavailability of 
standards, meaning many of the successes to date have been conceived and 
developed as closed ecosystems, solving a particular problem for a particular 
set of users.
1 
Government of India, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, DigiLocker Statistics. 2024.  
https://www.digilocker.gov.in/web/statistics 
2 President of Ukraine, “I Dream of a State in a Smartphone — Volodymyr Zelenskyy,” News, n.d., https://
www.president.gov.ua/en/news/ya-mriyu-pro-derzhavu-u-smartfoni-volodimir-zelenskij-55585 

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
8
FIGURE 1. Ukraine’s Diia “State in a Smartphone” presenting a driving license for verification
A new generation of standards-based digital wallets is changing this. These 
wallets build on the technological advances of the past decade to both 
improve how we prove identity, share data, and make a payment, while also 
improving interoperability. These digital wallets build on the capabilities of 
modern smartphones, while adding modern architectural features—such as 
modular, decentralized architectures—and aligning implementation to a set of 
recently-emerged open standards—particularly those for Verifiable Credentials. 
This represents a paradigm shift for all three domains, allowing these wallets 
to support transactions and service access across organizational, sectoral, and 
national borders.
These developments also reflect a broader trend toward not only interoperability 
but also functional convergence between these historically distinct domains. 
Digital identity, data sharing, electronic signing, and payments are increasingly 
discussed together as complementary components of a user-centric trust 
ecosystem. 
Many real-world implementations already combine identity with electronic 
signatures or integrate wallets into government service apps. Large consumer-
device platforms are moving in a similar direction: Apple, for example, has begun 
supporting mobile driver’s licenses and digital IDs and has announced support 
for the W3C Digital Credentials API. Regional initiatives like the European Union’s 
Digital Identity (EUDI) Framework are providing a cross-border trust framework 

9
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
allowing international mutual recognition of digital identity and electronic 
signatures across borders,3 leveraging new and emerging standards. Although 
the degree and pace of convergence will vary by domain, it is clear that these 
technologies are gradually moving closer together and shaping one another. 
The current generation of digital wallets are becoming multifunctional user-
centric data-sharing platforms, capable of managing and sharing a wide range of 
identity credentials as well as other personal data related to accessing services.
3	 Regulation (EU) 2024/1183 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 April 2024 amending 
Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 as regards establishing the European Digital Identity Framework http://data.
europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1183/oj
FIGURE 2. Illustration of past and current digital identity, data sharing, payment and wallet 
systems
Wallets
Mobile ID
Aadhaar  
eKYC
EUDI 
wallet
M-Pesa
PIX
Diia
X-Road
Solid pods
DigiLocker
Alipay
Apple Pay
Apple Passbook
Paypal
Payments
Convergence
Data 
sharing
Digital 
identity

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
10
Purpose and scope
This document provides a conceptual and architectural framework for 
understanding digital wallets, verifiable credentials, and their role in transforming 
digital identity, data sharing, electronic signing, and digital payments. It is 
intended primarily for government decision-makers and practitioners seeking 
to design, regulate, or oversee wallet ecosystems, although many concepts are 
equally relevant for private-sector participants of these ecosystems—including 
financial institutions, trust service providers, and technology platforms.
This paper focuses on how wallets work, what is new about them, and how they 
change digital identity, data sharing, electronic signatures, and payments. It also 
highlights the risks and challenges that implementers must address as these 
ecosystems grow. The paper is structured in three sections:
1.	 Section 1 – How do wallets work? This section explains the key 
architectural concepts needed to understand digital wallets, as well as 
examining the institutional and governance implications. It addresses 
the roles of credential issuers, holders, and verifiers, the function of the 
common trust infrastructure, and the distinction between the wallet as a 
technical component and the applications that host it.
2.	 Section 2 – What is new with wallets? This section examines how 
wallets are poised to transform four key domains—data sharing, digital 
identity, electronic signatures, and payments—and highlights the value 
of the wallet paradigm compared to traditional approaches.
3.	 Section 3 – Risks and future trends. This final section discusses 
ecosystem-level challenges such as governance complexity, inclusivity, 
revocation, and consent fatigue, and explores future trends including 
potential integration of AI agents and scenarios for cross-domain 
convergence.

11
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
Digital Wallet Policy Note Series
This paper forms part of the Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, which offers a 
comprehensive, modular reference for governments and partners working on 
next-generation digital identity and data-sharing ecosystems, and consists of 
the following notes.
1.	 Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm 
Convergence of User-Centric Digital Identity, Data Sharing, and 
Payments
2.	 Digital Wallets: Trust Frameworks 
Governing the Ecosystem
3.	 Digital Wallets: Implementation
Practical Guidance for Deploying Wallets at National Scale
Together, these papers offer an end-to-end view of digital wallet design, 
governance, and implementation. The present paper, the first in the series, provides 
the conceptual and technical foundation upon which the later notes build.

How do 
wallets work?
1

13
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
Wallets and apps 
Many government service apps like Ukraine’s Diia,4 Singapore’s SingPass,5 
Brazil’s gov.br,6 Jordan’s Sanad,7 or the United Arab Emirates’ UAE PASS8 have 
brought value to citizens by integrating many common functions needed to 
access services—such as digital identity and electronic signing—and easy 
access to official documents and personal data that can be shared as needed. 
In traditional implementations, these functions were often coupled tightly 
together and implemented as part of a single government app. While the app 
might present to the user a “wallet” containing various official documents like a 
birth certificate or a driving record, these “documents” were traditionally built into 
the app itself, which may fetch data to populate them on the backend based on 
demand from the user. 
Although the tight integration of such an application can simplify implementation 
while offering an excellent user experience, this can come at the price of scalability 
and future extensibility. With such an architecture, adding new functionality, data 
sources, or documents to the app requires its developers to go back and modify 
the overall platform to accommodate them. Such a monolithic architecture can 
also result in a “black box” phenomenon, with some inherent loss of visibility and 
control as to how these additional data and documents are managed and used. 
It is notable that, despite their success, Singpass, Diia and Sanad are now either 
considering or moving towards implementation of a defined digital wallet function 
that is in line with the emerging international standards discussed in this paper. 
Integrating such government service apps into a user-centric datastore based on 
a wallet architecture can facilitate scalability by eliminating reliance on a single 
application or implementing entity to expand to new service providers or sources 
of eligibility data. Responsibility for implementing various components of the 
data ecosystem can be delegated to different entities, with the wallet providing 
a platform or orchestrating collaboration between them. Simultaneously, it 
allows for a leap forward in user experience, as the user has all of the data and 
credentials needed to identify themselves and prove their eligibility to access a 
service under their own control, right at their fingertips.  
4 Ministry of Digital Transformation Ukraine, “Diia App.” https://go.diia.app/ 
5 
Chan, Cheow Hoe; Cooper, Adam Kenneth; Marskell, Jonathan Daniel. National Digital Identity and 
Government Data Sharing in Singapore : A Case Study of Singpass and APEX (English). Washington, D.C. 
: World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/099300010212228518 
6 Government of Brazil, “Government Apps.” https://www.gov.br/en/apps 
7 
Tullis, Christopher Boyd. 2025. Jordan Digital Public Infrastructure Diagnostic.  
Bank. https://doi.org/10.1596/42812 
8 UAEPass, “Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ).” https://uaepass.ae/faq 

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
14
Architecture
In its essence, a digital wallet is a term for a software container that allows users 
to receive, hold, and share digital credentials in a form that can be easily read 
and verified by a third party. In some cases, these credentials may resemble 
traditional credentials (e.g., ID cards, plane tickets, educational diplomas) while 
in other cases they may be digitally native (e.g., payment tokens). 
Due to the standardization of the interface between the wallet and the credentials, 
there is no limit to the number of credential issuers who can issue credentials into 
the wallet. It also allows multiple wallets to be used without impact on the 
credential issuers, allowing different wallet providers to be active in the same 
ecosystem. The result is a fully modular and, in principle, infinitely scalable 
system that allows users to share data about themselves with trusted recipients. 
When it comes to implementation, digital wallet functions are typically 
implemented as part of a smartphone app. This app may include broader 
functionality than just credential management. For example, such applications 
may integrate electronic signatures, allowing users to sign documents, 
including those generated using the data on the credentials. Wallets may also 
be combined with online banking apps (e.g. Sparkasse9), built into smartphone 
operating systems (e.g., Apple10), or integrated into e-government service 
applications (e.g. Diia11). 
Bundling wallets with the applications and devices that people already use 
to access services can fluidify otherwise cumbersome workflows, like logging 
in, or sharing documents to prove one’s eligibility. Wallets have the potential to 
enable all sorts of cross-sector interactions—linking credentials from areas like 
finance, health, or education—and to support event-driven service workflows 
(although such application logic sits outside the wallet itself).
9	 For example, the German bank Sparkasse recently announced that it would integrate a standards-
compliant digital wallet compatible with the European regulations into its online banking app. See: 
Deutscher Sparkassen- und Giroverband (DSGV). 2025. “DSGV präsentiert Wero-Integration in EUDI-
Wallet auf Souveränitätsgipfel in Berlin.” Press release No. 66, 18 November 2025. https://www.dsgv.de/
newsroom/presse/251118-pm-souveraenitaetsgipfel-66.html 
10	 See: Apple (2025), “Apple introduces Digital ID, a new way to create and present an ID in Apple Wallet.” 
https://www.apple.com/newsroom/2025/11/apple-introduces-digital-id-a-new-way-to-create-and-
present-an-id-in-apple-wallet/ 
11	 Although Diia, launched in 2020, was not originally based on a wallet architecture, the Ukrainian 
government is currently in the process of transitioning a wallet-based architecture that will be 
interoperable with EU digital identity wallets. https://cms-lawnow.com/en/ealerts/2025/06/ukraine-adopts-
use-of-digital-id-wallets-meeting-eu-standards 

15
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
Due to these implementation trends, sometimes the concept of a digital wallet is 
conflated in common usage with the software application that contains it. In this 
paper we adopt a narrower definition of a “wallet”, using the term to refer to the 
technical datastore component itself. This is to avoid confusion between digital 
wallets and the apps they may be part of, which can vary substantially. This also 
allows for a focused discussion below on how the concept of a digital wallet 
has come, over time, to be defined in this way, as well as how digital wallets can 
transform how we think about digital ID and trusted data sharing as part of a 
wider DPI ecosystem. 
Components
Defining the term “digital wallet” requires introduction of three additional 
concepts: the issuer, holder, and verifier. These three concepts are the basis of 
the main standards that ensure wallet interoperability.12 Common definitions also 
define digital wallets in terms of the interplay of these roles.13
•	 Issuer. The issuer of verifiable credentials plays a foundational role
by creating and signing verifiable credentials. These credentials are
typically cryptographically protected to ensure they remain authentic
and untampered. The issuer guarantees the accuracy of the information
included, ensuring verification against an appropriate authoritative
data source, managed either by the issuer itself or by a third party. The
trustworthiness of the issuer and the underlying data source is critical, as
it underpins the entire system.
•	 Holder. Once issued, these credentials are entrusted to the credential
holder, an architectural role that can be decomposed into a user (natural
person or legal entity) who assumes control over the credential, and
the secure wallet application that enables their secure control and
12	 These include, for example, the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) Verifiable Credentials Data Model, 
ISO/IEC 18013-7 (mDL), IETF SD-JWT-based Verifiable Credentials, and the OpenID for Verifiable 
Credentials (OID4VP, OID4VCI) standards.
13	 For example, the Open ID Foundation defines a digital wallet as “An entity used by the Holder to request, 
receive, store, present, and manage Verifiable Credentials and cryptographic key material.”
OpenID for Verifiable Credential Issuance 1.0 - https://openid.net/specs/openid-4-verifiable-credential-
issuance-1_0.html 

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
16
FIGURE 3. Illustrative data model for verifiable credential wallets
User
Wallet App
Verifiable Trust Anchors
ISSUER
VERIFIER
HOLDER
Verifiable 
credential
Acquires, stores, 
presents credentials
Verifies presentations
Issues credentials
Trusts
Issues VCs
Trusts
Authoritative 
data
Credential 
revocation
Trusted 
Lists
Certificate 
revocation
Public 
Keys
Sends VPs
management.14 The holder determines when, where, and how credentials 
can be shared, and is able to selectively disclose information drawn from 
one or more credentials in their wallet to verifiers. When data from one 
or multiple verifiable credentials is shared, the data packet combined for 
disclosure is called a verifiable presentation.
•	Verifier. The verifier completes the ecosystem by requesting and validating 
the credentials presented by the holder. The verifier’s responsibility is to 
ensure that the credential is authentic and issued by a trusted source. 
This validation process involves cryptographic checks to confirm that the 
credential remains genuine and has not been revoked. The verifier relies 
on the reliability of the issuers and underlying data sources as well as the 
common trust infrastructure undergirding the ecosystem to ensure trust in 
the credentials.
The relationship between issuers, holders, and verifiers in the digital wallet 
architecture is illustrated in Figure 3.
14	 The reader should note that the W3C data model collapses the wallet and user roles into one role, called 
the Holder. Given the scope and user-centric focus of this paper, the below discussion considers the user 
and wallet separately.

17
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
Depending on the use case and the type of credential in question, different 
actors may play these generic roles of issuer, holder, or verifier. For example, 
in the case of international travel, the passport authority (issuer) might issue a 
passport into the digital wallet of a citizen (holder), which they would later present 
to the border police (verifier) when leaving the country. A final role—that of the 
authoritative data source—is introduced when we account for the fact that there 
is usually also a need to verify the data being written onto the credential before 
issuance to ensure accuracy.
To allow extensibility, issuers and verifiers must be able to trust each other, even 
when they do not know each other or have direct visibility into their operations. 
Such trust is assured by both technology (cryptography) and non-technology 
(governance) elements. 
TABLE 1. Overview of key functional roles in a wallet ecosystem
Use case
Roles
Issuer
Holder
Verifier
Authoritative 
data source
User
Wallet
Identity 
verification
National 
identification 
authority
Citizen
Wallet 
provider
[various]
Civil registry
Travel
Passport 
authority
Traveler
Border 
police
National 
passport registry
Employment
University
Graduate
Employer
University 
diploma registry

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
18
The cryptographic elements are of central importance: the word “verifiable” in the 
W3C standard is a shorthand for “cryptographically verifiable.” In practice, this 
means that credentials need to be digitally signed by issuers and those digital 
signatures authenticated by verifiers. Traditionally, a digital identity provider 
might have operated their own public key infrastructure (PKI) to facilitate this 
kind of verification or otherwise have contracted out this function to a vendor 
offering PKI-as-a-service. As the ecosystem scales to more issuers, this model 
of spooling up in-house PKIs or managing bilateral relationships with PKI vendors 
can lead to duplicative investments while also impeding interoperability and 
undermining verifiers’ trust in the digital signatures used to ensure integrity of 
the data on the credentials.  
The need to underpin trust in the wallet ecosystem leads to the addition of two 
non-functional roles:  
•	Common trust infrastructure. Serving as the technical foundation of 
the wallet ecosystem, the trust infrastructure, also known as PKI, ensures 
credential data provided by any issuer can be cryptographically verified 
by any verifier in the scheme.15 Although it is possible for credential issuers 
to implement their own PKI in-house, in implementations with multiple 
issuers and verifiers it is common to abstract PKI operations away from 
issuers and verifiers to reduce complexity and cost while improving the 
overall security, interoperability, and scalability of the wallet ecosystem.
•	Trust framework. This component comprises the various governance 
layers needed to ensure trust in the wallet ecosystem and the underlying 
trust infrastructure. The trust framework includes granular elements from 
policies and procedures up to governance and compliance frameworks. 
Depending on their scope and purpose, a trust framework may also 
include formal agreements or even enabling legislation. 
15	 Specific components of this trust infrastructure can vary depending on implementation, but may include 
elements such as a registry of public keys to be used for verification, a list of approved trust service 
providers, and/or a list of revoked digital certificates or credentials. 

19
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
BOX 1. Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
PKI provides the foundation for generating and verifying the digital 
signatures that enable credentials to be trusted by verifiers. When a 
credential is issued, the issuer writes only verified data to the credential 
before digitally signing it to protect it from later modification or tampering.
Digital signatures themselves are an application of asymmetric cryptography, 
which relies on mathematically linked pairs of cryptographic keys: one 
private key (kept secret by the signer) and one public key (shared so that 
others can verify the signatures they create). The security of this system 
depends on two things: signers safeguarding their private keys, and verifiers 
being able to confirm that the public key they use truly belongs to the signer 
in question.
PKI provides the various mechanisms needed to accomplish this. These 
mechanisms—consisting not only of technology but also people and process 
elements—provide the means to manage these keys securely and to confirm 
the authenticity of public keys during signature verification.  Because PKI 
implementation requires highly sophisticated infrastructure and specialized 
skills some organizations operate it in-house while others leverage external 
PKI-as-a-service providers, also known as trust service providers.16
16	 For a deeper discussion of PKI architecture and components, see: Tullis, Christopher; Black, 
David. 2025. Public Key Infrastructure: Implementing High-Trust Electronic Signatures. Digital Public 
Infrastructure Policy Note Series; December 2024. © World Bank. https://doi.org/10.1596/42663  

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
20
Scope 
As mentioned above, and contrary to common usage of the term, the “wallet” is 
not synonymous with a smartphone app. Although the distinction is not apparent 
to users, from an implementation perspective it is important to distinguish the 
wallet itself from the smartphone apps—or other user interfaces used to access 
it—and the credentials stored in it. The wallet itself refers specifically to the 
secure container for credentials held by the user that facilitates the management 
and presentation of credentials. The standards related to wallets are typically 
concerned not only with the wallet itself, but ensuring that verifiable credentials 
can be securely issued into it, and that verifiable presentations created using it 
can be securely verified. The standards therefore also include within their scope 
a set of interfaces or connectors that facilitate secure communication between 
the wallet and the systems managed by issuers and verifiers.  
The user interface and application layers, however, fall out of scope of these 
standards, and can vary quite a bit depending on the use cases in question 
and type of issuers, users, and verifiers involved. Such interfaces must be in 
place not only at the level of the wallet, but also for issuers and verifiers, for the 
ecosystem to function. 
Smartphone applications are not the only way that a wallet can be accessed. 
A notable exception is wallets designed to store documents related to legal 
persons (such as corporate entities). Since corporations are not human, they 
cannot themselves carry smartphones. Therefore, the interfaces that allow 
the credentials to be accessed and presented—for example, by company 
directors or other authorized representatives—may be more complex than 
a simple smartphone application, potentially requiring integration between 

21
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
wallets designed for businesses (legal persons) and people (natural persons). 
(Although there are a number of digital wallet initiatives globally that are targeted 
specifically to use cases involving legal entities—including the Indian “Entity 
Locker” program and the European Union’s “Business Wallet” framework—a 
comprehensive treatment of business wallets is out of scope of this policy note.)  
For issuers, things are a little bit more complex due to the need to integrate 
the issuer functionality and interface (which are standardized) with existing 
systems.  Issuers typically already have their own backend processes and 
verification methods to ensure credential accuracy and prevent fraud when 
issuing traditional physical credentials. These systems and processes must be 
adapted for the issuance of digital credentials and integrated into standardized 
interfaces with the wallet and the common trust layer. 
Like issuers, verifiers must also integrate their existing systems into the wallets and 
common trust infrastructure using these standardized connectors. However, an 
additional complexity is a need to re-engineer their existing business processes 
and systems to integrate wallet-based verification workflows in a meaningful 
way. If verification systems are siloed from the main systems and business 
processes used to deliver services, then verification will have to be done out 
of band, significantly diminishing the benefits of wallet-based data sharing. But 
for verifiers to take this step, the benefits of adopting the wallet model must be 
clear to them and these benefits must outweigh the costs of converting existing 
systems and retraining their personnel.
FIGURE 4. Scope of key sub-systems in a digital wallet architecture
HOLDER
App
Wallet
Backend Systems
Backend Systems
Common Trust Infrastructure
ISSUER
VERIFIER
Authoritative 
Data Source
Business 
Processes
Legacy
Systems
Issuer 
Interface
Verifier
Interface
Legacy
Systems

What is new 
with wallets?
2

23
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
T
his section expands on the previous sections by looking at the 
functionality of digital wallets from the perspectives of their main 
supported functions—digital identity and user-centric data sharing—
examining the value addition of the wallet paradigm for each. 
Integrating these two functions in a user-centric and privacy-preserving way 
can be considered the most novel and transformative aspects of the digital 
wallet paradigm from the perspective of public service delivery.
After discussing identity and data sharing, the paper then turns to two additional 
functions often coupled with digital identity and credential wallets: electronic 
signatures and payments. These functionalities, when integrated into digital 
wallet apps, can increase their relevance for a wider variety of use cases. 
While not native to the issuer-credential-verifier paradigm, electronic signatures 
and payments functionality are natural complements to user-centric identification 
and data sharing, offering an end-to-end solution for completing many real-
world use cases. 

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
FIGURE 5. Using a digital wallet to access services in person (indicative transaction flow) 
User meets service 
provider staff in person
User 
authenticates 
to wallet
Wallet shares 
data with 
service 
provider
Service provider 
compares portrait 
received with 
user’s face   
User confirms 
data to be 
shared
RELYING 
PARTY
RELYING 
PARTY
CITIZEN
Service provider staff 
requests data from wallet

25
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
Data sharing
How did we get here?
Traditionally, individuals seeking to prove their eligibility for products or services 
typically had to manually collect physical documents—such as tax records, 
land titles, birth certificates, or proof of school enrollment—and present them 
in person.17 This approach created significant friction, delays, and opportunities 
for errors or fraud, due to the difficulties evaluating the authenticity of paper 
documents.
As the underlying data registries increasingly became digitized, it becomes 
possible in principle to automatically verify data against the authoritative source. 
Initially the data-sharing models used to do this involved direct point-to-point 
integrations between backend systems, often facilitated by custom-built APIs 
(Figure 6). While improving over paper-based processes, sharing data through 
such ad hoc, bilateral connections has a number of limitations. Scalability was 
a particular challenge due to the need for bilateral arrangements and custom 
integrations to assure interoperability between systems on a pairwise basis.  
To mitigate these challenges, various types of middleware layers emerged, to 
reduce the complexity inherent in maintaining a series of bilateral data sharing 
arrangements. Such middleware layers also provide discovery mechanisms, 
such as API gateways or enterprise service buses, and may also include technical 
measures to ease integration complexity and provide some scalability. Some 
limitations, however, persisted. 
This approach resulted in tightly coupled relationships between issuers and 
relying parties, raising concerns around scalability, operational efficiency, 
and privacy, as issuers became aware of every verification request made by 
individuals. In addition, these approaches have significant limitations when 
it comes to user empowerment and user centricity. User-centric approaches, 
such as conditioning data sharing on user consent, are technically challenging 
to implement with such middleware architectures, given their focus on backend 
integration rather than user-centric interfaces. 
17	 The discussion of data sharing in this paper is limited to the sharing of personal data in the context of 
public and private service delivery to individual users. For a broader discussion of data sharing, including 
personal data, the reader is referred to Tullis, C. Forthcoming. “TTrusted Data Sharing: Implementation 
Framework for Data Reuse and Value Creation” Washington, DC: World Bank.

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
26
FIGURE 6. Data sharing through bilateral arrangements  
Authoritative 
Source
Complex bilateral 
Sharing agreements 
& integration 
Relying 
Parties
Multiple Methods 
& Logons
Users
Meaningfully empowering users over how their data is accessed and used can 
be similarly challenging. For example, although many systems do offer user-
consultable transaction logs and other transparency measures, it may not always 
be clear to users how that data should be interpreted or actioned. Finally, data-
layer interoperability is out of scope of such integration-focused systems, which 
lack measures to ensure adoption of common semantic and quality standards. 
To address such limitations in user-centricity and empowerment, decentralized 
personal data stores and user-centric models such as India’s DigiLocker have 
sought to provide users direct control over their data. While representing a leap 
forward in user centricity, such systems still face issues with interoperability 
with and adoption by relying parties. Given that the documents stored in these 
data stores are modular (stored as individual files in the data store itself), this 
model does not pose the same challenges with scalability and extensibility as 
the other models discussed above. However, there is limited standardization of 
these documents and of the process for issuing them, and there are not always 
mechanisms in place—whether at the technology or governance levels—to 
ensure that the documents can be verified and trusted by relying parties. Lack of 
standardization also leads to challenges integrating into legacy systems, which 
could lead to these documents being difficult to access and share in practice.   
A final trend is integrated “identity” apps, including government-issued ones like 
Singapore’s SingPass and Jordan’s Sanad. These apps overcome some of the 
challenges discussed above by bringing together digital identity and electronic 

27
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
signature capabilities alongside access to a digital version of several common 
government-issued documents. These apps greatly simplify access to certain 
(usually government) services and can enable some types of user-centric data-
sharing transactions. However, architecturally speaking, such identity apps are 
often passthrough apps, displaying virtual versions of documents on the fly, 
the content of which is based on data fetched in real time from an underlying 
database. Apps architected in this way can have the same scalability issues 
as other types of systems relying on direct point-to-point backend integration. 
The lack of modular credentials can limit extensibility to new data or document 
types, and the closed nature of the app itself can limit extensibility to new relying 
parties, particularly outside of government.  
Limitations of traditional paradigms
As discussed above, these various approaches to sharing data have some 
limitations:
•	Scalability. Traditional data sharing methods typically require custom 
bilateral arrangements and integrations, which quickly become complex 
and difficult to scale.
•	User empowerment. Backend-centric approaches often lack mechanisms 
for meaningful user consent, visibility into data sharing activities, and 
effective user control over personal data.
•	Transparency. Even when available, the audit logs and data sharing 
records that allow users to verify ex post what data has been shared 
about them can be difficult for users to interpret or act upon, reducing 
their practical impact.
•	Interoperability. Limited or inconsistent adoption of standardized data 
formats and quality frameworks complicates integration across different 
ecosystem actors. 
•	Extensibility. Centralized and closed architectures commonly limit the 
ability to easily integrate new data sources, credential types, or relying 
parties without significant redevelopment efforts.

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
28
Benefits of wallets
Wallet-based data sharing addresses traditional limitations by fundamentally 
restructuring the architectures used to share data from a centralized paradigm 
oriented around backend communication between databases to a distributed 
model with the user front and center. The wallet serves as a secure, user-
controlled container holding modular, standardized credentials issued by 
authoritative sources. By decoupling credential issuance from data sharing, 
the wallet architecture eliminates the need for complex backend integrations 
between issuers and relying parties to enable trusted data sharing. 
This modular approach improves scalability of the ecosystem, as the wallet 
provides a platform that can technically accommodate an infinite number of 
credentials and issuers, provided they comply with established standards. Relying 
parties benefit from automatic interoperability, as credentials issued by any 
compliant issuer can be seamlessly verified without the complexity associated 
with additional integrations or other bilateral arrangements. The wallet platform, 
and any government apps built on it, are also fully extensible, as they allow new 
credentials and data sources to be seamlessly added to the ecosystem without the 
app requiring redevelopment or other backend integrations. They allow multiple 
data credentials from disparate entities to be dynamically combined within the 
user’s wallet, enabling more complex service delivery workflows to be executed 
seamlessly (e.g., life-event transactions requiring multiple consultations).
Transparency and user empowerment are other key benefits, as wallets place 
users at the center of data-sharing transactions. Since individuals must actively 
create and share verifiable presentations, wallets provide users with proactive 
(ex ante) control over data disclosure, in contrast to traditional, reactive (ex post) 
control methods like audit logs.
This ability for users to control the sharing of their data in a privacy-preserving 
environment is fundamental to the wallet ecosystem. Even where wallets only 
contain an ID credential, data from that credential can still be shared selectively. 
This is a clear advantage of wallet-based data-sharing workflows over traditional 
ID cards, since the latter cannot be used without disclosing all of the data written 
on it to the verifier. With selective disclosure, however, the user can make claims 
that reveal little or no personal data. For instance, a wallet could allow a user 
to share only key biographical attributes (e.g., name and date of birth) while 
withholding others that are irrelevant to most transactions (e.g., gender/sex). 
Simple statements such as “I am over 18” can obviate the need to disclose one’s 
full birthday, while other minimal verifiable presentations such as “I have paid my 
taxes” can prove compliance without having to disclose sensitive information 
such as one’s income. 

FIGURE 7. Using digital wallets to access services online (indicative transaction flow) 
User is referred to wallet 
by service provider
User confirms data 
to be shared
Wallet shares data 
with service provider
User receives 
service
User authenticates 
to wallet
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
30
FIGURE 8. User-centric data sharing using digital wallets
Issuers
User Centric 
Control
Common trust infrastructure
Verifiers
Furthermore, information need only be shared with service providers or 
individuals that the user trusts and only when the user decides to share that data. 
Where multiple credentials are held in the wallet (in addition to the ID credential), 
the user may also selectively disclose the minimum amount of data required for 
service eligibility or access minimizing risks of data oversharing or infringements 
of privacy.
The decentralized wallet model also reduces risks of surveillance as there is no 
direct ability for issuers of credentials to know where they are used or what they 
are used for. This is in stark contrast to centralized systems where every access 
to a service or sharing of data can be tracked. 
The wallet model also provides a technical foundation for implementing consent-
based data sharing workflows, a common legal basis for data sharing under 
data protection legislation. While the creation of Verifiable Presentations alone 
does not in general constitute legally valid consent, wallets can combine these 
presentations with complementary functionalities such as electronic signatures 
and consent record storage (e.g., consent terms stored in the wallet, also as 
verifiable credentials) to clearly document the scope of user consent and what 
has been agreed to.18 
18	 Such consent receipts may themselves be standardized and recorded as verifiable credentials, for 
example using ISO/IEC TS 27560:2023 (consent record information structure).

31
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
Digital identity
How did we get here?
Digital ID evolved from the need to not only provide a means of accessing digital 
systems but to also identify the person behind the keyboard. Access to digital 
systems started, and continues in many ways, by providing an identifier (an ID 
number or a username) for the user and allowing them to set a password (a secret 
that only they should know), for subsequent access to that system. The problems 
with this are myriad, leading to the username/password paradigm providing 
very little protection against fraud and unauthorised access. Enhancements 
followed such as 2-factor authentication (e.g. one-time-passcodes or mobile 
authenticators). Increasingly, authentication also includes a biometric factor to 
increase trust when accessing systems and to better protect against fraud or 
attack. 
These improvements in authentication methods whilst increasingly effective still 
leave a problem for service providers: who is actually accessing their service, and 
are they really who they claim to be? In addition to ensuring that authentication 
factors used are secure, it is also necessary to verify the identity of an individual 
ID holder, which is just as important as the authentication mechanism. 
The needs of the user are also far more central to the design of digital ID 
compared to the more system-centered design approach of previous decades. 
User expectations are also higher as consumer technology and mobile devices 
become ever more functional and easier to operate. Previous generations of 
digital ID were often designed with the needs of a central agency or function in 
mind, with security concerns or ease of implementation taking precedence over 
user experience.  

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
32
FIGURE 9. Traditional digital identity paradigm 
Digital ID App
Data Source
Identity Provider
Digital Identity
Digital ID
issuance
Data sharing
Identity claim
Verified
Identity
Authorization
Verified
eligibility
USER
Relying party
Elegibility data
Identity 
Attributes
Identity Attributes
Limitations of traditional paradigms
Distinct from the interaction between issuers, holders, and verifiers as outlined 
above for wallets, the traditional digital identity paradigm is based on the 
interaction between two main actors: Identity Providers and Relying Parties. 
This is an extension of what is essentially a centralized model of identity 
verification and authentication which, even when federated to included multiple 
identity providers, relies on a third party for users to be identified to the services 
they wish to access. 
Identity providers (IdPs) issue digital identities to users, while relying parties 
verify (or “rely on”) these digital identities. The role of the IdPs encompasses the 
same scope as that of issuer(s) and the holder in the wallet paradigm. To access 
a service, the user will typically present to the relying party (or “claim”) their 
digital identity, who, after verifying it, will typically consider this verified identity 
alongside other data related to eligibility before making the decision to authorize 
access to that service.19 The workflow, including the complementary role of the 
identity providers and complementary data sources, is illustrated in Figure 9.
In the traditional digital identity paradigm, most of the responsibilities fall on the 
identity provider, as summarized in Table 2.
19	 A representative example of this paradigm can be found in NIST SP 800-63-3. https://doi.org/10.6028/
NIST.SP.800-63-3 

33
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
TABLE 2. Roles and responsibilities for implementing traditional digital identity
Identity provider
Relying party
•	Developing the digital identity system 
itself, including the database of identity 
attributes and any user interfaces (such 
as a smartphone app) 
•	Ensuring the security of the 
authentication factors used, including 
revocation and reissuance of 
compromised factors
•	Having the capability to digitally sign 
identity data to ensure integrity
•	Registering users and issuing digital 
identities to them 
•	Identity proofing during registration
•	Interoperate with the digital identity 
system
•	Engineer business processes to 
use identity verification
This traditional paradigm has some important limitations that limit their relevance 
and scalability; these include:
•	Scalability. Lack of interoperability can lead to monolithic system design, 
constraining the ability to include new functions or integrate additional 
data sources. 
•	Focus on identity attributes. Because traditional identity systems have 
often emphasized strong assurance of identity attributes, this has led 
identity systems to be cordoned off from the other data sources that are 
relevant to delivering services.
•	Misalignment of roles. Implicit in the architecture of traditional digital 
identity systems is an assumption that a single actor will manage most 
aspects of digital identity issuance and management, which may not fully 
align with real-world institutional capabilities or mandates.

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
34
Benefits of wallets
From a user perspective, wallets present a number of benefits over previous 
approaches to digital identity. Previous generations of digital ID were not always 
realized alongside sufficiently compelling real-world use cases to demonstrate 
value. One reason for this is because many real-world use cases require data 
beyond simple identity attributes. Users are not simply trying to prove who they 
are online, but rather to prove that they are entitled to access a specific service. 
As a rule, this requires additional data relevant to their eligibility. To take some 
examples, income statements may be required to access social assistance, 
proof of address might be required to open a bank account, or evidence of tax 
payment may be required to start a business. 
The wallet architecture can bring together identity attributes with other data 
sources related to eligibility in one place and allow them to be verified and 
presented seamlessly while accessing services. The ability to have various types 
of credentials issued once, and re-combine and re-assert the data on them to 
an unlimited number of verifiers in an unlimited number of ways, gives users an 
unprecedented level of control over their digital data as they access services.
Wallets also provide benefits to implementers. As discussed above, wallets 
represent a departure by splitting “digital identity” into two complementary 
constructs—wallets and credentials—which interoperate based on standardized 
interfaces. Because credential issuers are decoupled from the wallet solution, 
it is possible to integrate the various data needed for eligibility determination 
directly into the wallet, alongside the credentials used to prove the core identity 
attributes. This allows the verifier to have a single integration point—to the 
wallet—serving its various data needs. This can be much simpler for verifiers 
compared to managing a series of point-to-point integrations with the various 
data sources that it needs to consult. The wallet and its standard interfaces, as 
well as the common trust infrastructure providing for the credentials’ verifiability, 
obviate the need for separate integrations between verifiers and data sources.
This shift has a number of benefits. The first is scalability, since the wallet 
architecture can accommodate an unlimited number of credentials. This 
contrasts with traditional digital identity where expanding solution scope to data 
from sources beyond traditional identity attributes (like name, date of birth, etc.) 
could be a complex undertaking often requiring a series of bilateral point-to-
point integrations. 

35
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
FIGURE 10. Wallet-based digital identity paradigm 
Verifiable
presentation
Verifiable
Credential
Verifiable
Credential
Common Trust Infrastructure
USER
Wallet 
Identity credential
Selective disclose
Eligibility credential
ISSUER
VERIFIER
Authorization
Identity data
Credential Issuer
Elegibility data
Credential Issuer
The wallet provider has a considerably reduced scope compared to the identity 
provider, moving away from involvement in issuance, registration, and identity 
proofing, and focusing on how digital identity is used—the user interface, 
authentication, and the interface with verifiers. This specialized role of the 
wallet provider is a better fit for a specialized entity with experience in digital 
systems—whether public or private sector—allowing them to focus on operating 
a secure and usable platform, rather than managing the quality and security of 
the underlying data, much of which is already in the mandate or scope of other 
entities. The roles and responsibilities for wallet implementation are presented in 
Table 3.

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
36
TABLE 3. Roles and responsibilities for implementing digital identity wallets
Credential issuer
Wallet provider
Verifier
•	Developing and managing 
the credential issuance 
systems
•	Having the capability to 
digitally sign credentials
•	Registering users and 
issuing credentials to them 
•	Identity proofing during 
registration
•	Developing the wallet 
application, including any 
user interfaces (such as a 
smartphone app)
•	Ensuring the security of 
the authentication factors 
used, including revocation 
and reissuance of 
compromised factors
•	Comply with standards 
for credential acceptance 
including digital identity
•	Engineer business 
processes to use identity 
verification and digital 
credentials.
In many cases, implementing digital wallets can allow the technical architecture 
to more closely mirror the structure of the real world. At the technical level, the 
concept of a credential mirrors the paper and plastic documents that are in use 
today, and the notion of a wallet mirrors the way we carry them around. At the 
institutional level, allowing for entities to specialize in the issuance of (digital) 
credentials without having to implement all the other technology components of 
a wallet can better reflect a world with many institutions already issuing physical 
credentials but with no capacity or desire to build software around them. Just as 
one would not look to a leather goods supplier to issue a national ID card, one 
might ask why official identity credentials would be issued by a private firm—and 
yet this is exactly what the traditional digital identity paradigm assumes to be 
possible. 
By splitting digital identity into credentials and wallets, such issues are resolved 
and each actor can manage the system within its sphere of competence without 
real or perceived overlaps in responsibilities. In practice, that means that a 
national identification authority can manage credential issuance in the same way 
as it does for physical ID cards, while delegating the task of securely managing 
and using those credentials to another entity, such as a digital ministry or private 
firm with the requisite competence.  

37
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
TABLE 4. Traditional and wallet-based digital identity paradigms compared
Traditional paradigm
Wallet paradigm
Components
Digital identity
Digital wallet
+
Verifiable credentials
Roles
Identity provider
Wallet provider
+
Credential issuer
Electronic signatures
While not technically verifiable credentials, electronic signing is implemented in 
similar way, leveraging many of the same technical and governance fundamentals. 
For example, electronic signatures can be generated using the same common 
trust infrastructure that is used to sign verifiable presentations. Likewise, private 
keys (used for both credential presentation and electronic signing), which must 
be managed very securely to prevent their disclosure, can be securely stored 
using the same secure hardware elements20 and key management procedures. 
Additionally, both electronic signing and credential management workflows can 
be authorized using the same digital identity authentication components that are 
already built into digital identity wallets. 
For these reasons, as well as the opportunity presented by the ability to 
seamlessly create legally valid electronic signatures related to any document 
in the wallet datastore, digital identity wallets increasingly integrate electronic 
signing functionality directly into the overall package. 
20	 There are various strategies for implementing secure hardware elements for storage and management of 
cryptographic key material, including those managed by the user on the smartphone (e.g., on the device’s 
Secure Enclave or SIM card) as well as hosted options (e.g., a cloud-provisioned Hardware Security 
Module) that can be implemented even for based devices without such capabilities. 

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
38
How did we get here? 
The legal foundations of electronic signatures date back to the early expansion 
of the internet economy. The principle of functional equivalence, embodied 
notably in the 1998 UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce, enabled 
the first wave of the digital economy by ensuring that electronic signatures could 
not be invalidated in court solely on the basis that they were not handwritten. 
Due to the security weaknesses of some more basic electronic signatures—
which might be as simple as typing a name at the end of an email—there were 
efforts to make signatures more secure using cryptographic techniques, enabled 
by a PKI. In such implementations, a user is issued a digital certificate containing 
a private key they can use to generate electronic signatures. The challenges with 
these implementations include difficulties in securely issuing and managing the 
digital certificates, issues reliably identifying the users of the certificates, as well 
as substantial costs associated with assuring all of the above.21  
Some of the earlier generations of such PKI-based electronic signature tools, 
despite offering excellent security, saw limited adoption due to high costs and 
various usability limitations. For example, users of the electronic signature applet 
of the initial Estonian national eID cards launched in 2002 had to obtain a dedicated 
card reader, install specific drivers and software, ensure an activated digital 
certificate subscription, and use a desktop computer interface—significantly 
limiting widespread adoption beyond a few niche use cases typically tied to 
specific government services (e.g. eProcurement).
Subsequently, more user-friendly solutions emerged, notably cloud-based 
platforms like DocuSign and Adobe Sign, which simplified signature workflows 
and improved accessibility. Integrated into familiar document management tools, 
these platforms resolved many usability issues but introduced complexities 
related to securely integrating digital identities to ensure that digital certificates 
where being used by the signer they were issued to. In parallel, some countries 
that had initially rolled out card-based signing solutions (including Estonia) 
shifted to more user-friendly options, such as smartphone applications.22
21	 A discussion of PKI and digital signature technology is out of scope of this paper, but readers interested 
in learning more are referred to: Tullis, Christopher; Black, David. 2025. Public Key Infrastructure: 
Implementing High-Trust Electronic Signatures. Digital Public Infrastructure Policy Note Series; December 
2024. https://doi.org/10.1596/42663  
22	 For more information about electronic signatures, readers are referred to: Tullis, Christopher; Constantine, 
Nay; Cooper, Adam. 2024. Electronic Signatures: Enabling Trusted Digital Transformation. Digital 
Transformation Policy Note Series; September 2024. https://doi.org/10.1596/42186 

39
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
Limitations of traditional paradigms
Despite high security assurances, these traditional systems exhibit significant 
drawbacks:
•	Usability limitations. Dependence on specific devices to generate 
signatures and challenges integrating into service delivery workflows or 
document management tools can create friction in the user experience. 
•	Assuring identity. Securely binding digital certificates to users’ identities 
requires robust processes and infrastructure, which can be expensive 
and challenging, particularly if an existing digital identity system cannot 
be relied on. 
•	Cost. Especially when implemented as standalone electronic signature 
solutions, high costs can be associated with registration, certificate 
management, and secure devices, which can hamper adoption, especially 
if passed on to relying parties or end users. 
Benefits of wallets
By including an electronic signing capability in the same environment alongside 
the documents to be signed as well as the digital identity needed to verify the 
identity of the signer, wallets can provide an environment in which a signature 
workflow can be accomplished end-to-end without complex integrations and 
other disruptions to the user experience. This integration enables wallets to 
combine identity verification, credential presentation, and legally valid electronic 
signatures with a single environment, without the complexity and cost associated 
with integrating standalone systems.  
Additionally, the emergence of cloud-based signing workflows in recent years 
is also leading to a move away from device-specific hardware implementations 
and has enabled a turn toward smartphone-based solutions and digital wallets. 
Wallet-enabled and cloud-based signing workflows have the potential to allow 
optimization of both security and a simple user experience in a way not possible 
with previous iterations of electronic signature technology.
Finally, by relying on the common trust infrastructure underlying the overall 
wallet ecosystem, electronic signature capabilities can be integrated into wallets 
simply, without the wallet provider or credential issuers needing to separately 

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
40
deploy or acquire a PKI themselves. A common, interoperable trust layer—that 
includes interoperable PKI functionality that can be used by all wallet ecosystem 
participants—abstracts the complexity of managing digital certificates away 
from ecosystem actors, simplifying their operations while cutting costs through 
competition and economies of scale. 
Payments
Payments are discussed last because, unlike digital identity, data sharing, or 
electronic signatures, the relationship between payments and credential wallets 
is evolving more gradually, and the final destination is not yet obvious.
Current payment systems are already well established. Traditional card networks 
like Visa, Mastercard, UnionPay, and JCB have been in place for decades 
and support global card-based payments. In parallel, many countries have 
implemented account-to-account and faster, or “instant,” payment schemes, 
including Brazil’s Pix, the EU’s SEPA Instant, and India’s UPI. Mobile-money 
schemes have also proved transformative in many markets worldwide—
especially for populations excluded from traditional banking systems—with 
notable examples including M-Pesa (East Africa), Orange Money (West Africa), 
GCash (Philippines), and AliPay and WeChat Pay (China).
All of these payment infrastructures, or “rails,” rely on mature technologies, long-
standing commercial arrangements, and detailed trust and liability frameworks, 
and are used every day by billions of people. The level of integration of today’s 
digital payments into economic life is, in this sense, not comparable to that of 
electronic signatures or data sharing, both of which still rely on paper-based 
processes in many jurisdictions.
Alongside these established payment rails, many consumer-facing payment 
wallets have emerged. These do not replace the underlying rails; instead, they 
provide a convenient interface for initiating payments and for interoperating with 
existing infrastructure. Major examples include device-integrated wallets such 
as Apple Pay, Google Pay, Samsung Pay, Huawei Pay, and Garmin Pay. Other 
platforms, such as AliPay and WeChat Pay, combine closed-loop functionality with 
the ability to initiate payments through third-party rails within the same interface.

41
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
Although payment wallets and verifiable-credential wallets serve different 
purposes, they share several architectural features. Payment tokens are not 
verifiable credentials in the strict sense, but—similarly to electronic-signing 
functions—they rely on comparable device-security mechanisms, cryptographic 
key material, and trusted execution environments. As a result, while today’s 
credential wallets and payment wallets do not use the same standards or back-
end data models, they have overlapping design patterns. On the user-interface 
layer, they are often presented as a single “wallet” containing both payment 
instruments and various credentials. A comparison between the current 
generation of payment wallets and credential wallets, including their underlying 
technologies, is provided in the Annex.
Any future convergence between credential wallets and payment wallets will 
therefore unfold within a complex landscape of existing payment rails, merchant-
acceptance networks, business models, liability frameworks, and deeply rooted 
user habits. These factors create substantial inertia. Nevertheless, digital 
credentials and wallet architectures introduce capabilities—such as portable 
verified identity and strong device-based authentication—that are increasingly 
relevant to how payments are initiated and authorized, and that may influence 
the payment sector in various ways.
The following section briefly traces the history of digital payments and describes 
the current generation of payment wallets, examining their similarities and 
differences with today’s credential-wallet approaches. It then offers a short 
discussion of current and emerging trends that may support further convergence 
between payment and credential-wallet paradigms in the coming years.

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
42
How did we get here?
The evolution of payments over recent decades reflects both technological 
advancement and changing user expectations for convenience, speed, 
and security. What began as a highly centralized, institutional process has 
progressively moved towards consumer-centric, real-time, and mobile-first 
models.
The Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT), 
established in the 1970s, marked a foundational shift in cross-border payments 
by introducing a standardized messaging network. It replaced slow, manual 
processes with secure, electronic interbank communication. However, SWIFT 
itself does not move money; it coordinates messages between financial 
institutions, which can still result in settlement delays, particularly across time 
zones and jurisdictions. SWIFT is important as it marks the beginning of inter-
bank messaging, which remains the foundation of electronic payments to 
this day. 
The rise of online banking in the 1990s and early 2000s offered retail customers 
unprecedented access to manage accounts and initiate transfers from personal 
devices. While the underlying rails often still relied on batch processing, the user 
interface improved significantly. Banks began to digitize customer experiences, 
although payments often remained relatively slow and dependent on banking 
hours.
PayPal, launched in the late 1990s, abstracted away from some of these 
implementation details, simplifying transactions by acting as a trusted intermediary. 
It enabled individuals and merchants to send and receive payments using 
intuitive identifiers such as email addresses, bypassing the need to exchange 
bank account details. For the first time, internet-based payments became widely 
accessible, especially for e-commerce. PayPal sat on top of existing card and 
banking infrastructure but simplified the user experience.
The development of real-time or near-instant domestic payment schemes, such 
as the UK’s Faster Payments Service (introduced in 2008), India’s UPI, or the EU’s 
SEPA Instant Credit Transfer, responded to consumer and business demand for 
immediacy. These schemes enabled bank-to-bank transfers within seconds, 
24/7, fundamentally shifting expectations for speed and availability.
In parallel, digital wallets such as Apple Pay, Google Pay, and Samsung Pay 
emerged, enabling card-based payments via mobile devices. These wallets 
tokenize card details and offer biometric authentication, enhancing both 
convenience and security. Users can pay in-store or online without ever handling 

43
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
a physical card, and loyalty programs or transit passes are often integrated into 
the same app, extending their utility.
Limitations of traditional paradigms
In contemporary mobile-initiated payments, two primary mechanisms dominate 
how users engage with digital financial transactions via their mobile devices.
The first method involves users initiating payments directly through a mobile 
application provided by their Payment Service Provider (PSP), such as a bank or 
financial technology platform. These applications use a client-server architecture, 
where the mobile device acts as the client and communicates securely with the 
PSP’s backend infrastructure. User authentication in this model typically relies 
on a combination of factors. The primary factor is the user’s account credentials 
(such as a username and password or PIN), while a secondary factor—often 
biometric verification such as fingerprint or facial recognition—is used to 
establish the user’s identity and strengthen security. 
Additionally, the smartphone itself plays a critical role in the security model; it 
may provide hardware-based assurances, such as secure elements or trusted 
execution environments, which protect sensitive operations and data.
A second major method involves the use of digital wallets, such as Apple Pay, 
Google Pay, or Samsung Wallet, which allow users to make contactless payments 
using a virtual representation of a payment card (i.e., a digital instrument, the user 
enrolls a payment card into their iPhone or Apple Watch by verifying their identity 
with the issuing bank, often via an SMS code or app confirmation, and the card is 
then tokenized and stored securely within the device’s Secure Enclave).
In this model, the user does not need to interact directly with their PSP’s 
application for each transaction. Instead, the wallet application facilitates the 
payment process by presenting a tokenized version of the card to the point-of-
sale (POS) terminal using Near Field Communication technology. The card itself 
is not stored on the device in its original form; instead, the PSP or card issuer 
provisions a token, effectively a surrogate card number, into the secure element 
of the phone. This token is used in combination with a dynamic key generated at 
the time of transaction to ensure that the payment is unique and secure.

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
44
Benefits of wallets
CURRENT BENEFITS
Digital credential wallets have the potential to bring a variety of improvements to 
payment ecosystems. In the near term, these improvements are best understood 
as augmenting existing payment systems by strengthening everything that 
happens before, around, or after the movement of funds. The following non-
exhaustive examples illustrate how wallets can make today’s payment processes 
more secure and efficient while leveraging today’s payment rails to make the 
value transfer itself.
Onboarding and Know Your Customer (KYC). Instead of repeatedly submitting 
documents or undergoing identity checks for each financial service, individuals 
could share a verified identity credential directly from their wallet. This reduces 
the risk of impersonation and provides PSPs with higher confidence that the 
person authorizing a payment is the legitimate account holder. PSPs can also 
leverage official ID credentials stored in the wallet to perform customer due 
diligence and meet KYC requirements.
Payment authorization. Using the wallet during payment transaction can help 
to improve the strength of authentication when authorizing payments. Strong 
device-based authentication (biometrics, hardware security elements, etc.) 
already implemented in digital wallets can be used to authorize payments and 
to meet jurisdiction-specific regulatory obligations—such as Strong Customer 
Authentication (SCA) in the EU—without PSPs having to build and maintain 
these capabilities within their own mobile banking or online platforms.
Confirmation of payee. Recent fraud cases based on misdirected payments 
can illustrate the scale of the problem. Even the largest firms are not immune: 
for example, both Google and Facebook have suffered multimillion-dollar losses 
after paying fraudulent invoices issued by criminals impersonating legitimate 
suppliers. In more everyday contexts, attackers have placed fake QR codes, 
over merchants’ legitimate ones, at parking meters, restaurants, and transport 
kiosks, diverting payments to malicious accounts. SMS and email-based 
phishing schemes have also tricked users into paying into fraudulent accounts 
by spoofing a legitimate business. Verifiable credentials can mitigate these 
risks by allowing a merchant or payee to present a credential attesting that it 

45
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
is known, licensed, or otherwise authorized to receive a payment. The user’s 
wallet can verify before authorizing the payment. These checks can occur in the 
background with minimal user intervention. 
Proof of eligibility. Credential wallets can also support use cases “on the edges” 
of payments. In public-sector or humanitarian contexts, wallets can carry proofs 
of eligibility for targeted entitlements or vouchers for in-kind benefits in a form that 
is portable, secure, and resistant to fraud. At a distribution point or participating 
merchant, the recipient can simply present the relevant credential to confirm 
their entitlement. This can reduce leakage, streamline verification, and improve 
program delivery.
Legal representation. Credential wallets additionally support verification of 
legal and commercial representation, which is especially important in business-
to-business transactions. Credentials attesting to rights such as acting on behalf 
of a business or holding legal authority in a jurisdiction allow a payer or payee 
to demonstrate not only who they are but also what they are empowered to do. 
Traditionally, PSPs have had to verify these claims by consulting external sources 
such as commercial registers or beneficial ownership registries, or manually 
review legal documents like mandates and powers of attorney. Integrating these 
attestations as verifiable credentials directly into the wallet can help remove 
friction and inefficiency from these complex workflows.

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
46
Open finance. Finally, wallets can help enable more open and interoperable 
interactions among PSPs, which can contribute to the implementation of open-
banking and open-finance frameworks. Many current arrangements rely on 
proprietary APIs or bilateral data-sharing agreements that are expensive to build 
and maintain. A practical example can be seen in Singapore’s SGFinDex system, 
where users can authorize data sharing between financial institutions using 
government-issued digital identity credentials rather than bespoke integrations. 
Wallet-based verifiable credentials—such as attestations confirming that a bank 
has completed KYC on a customer or that an institution holds a valid regulatory 
license—could play a similar role. Because these attestations are signed and 
portable, PSPs can trust them without having to integrate directly with one 
another’s backend systems, supporting a more open and scalable financial 
ecosystem.
This non-exhaustive list of benefits presents some examples of how credential 
wallets can strengthen existing payment infrastructures and improve the 
efficiency of financial transactions. 
FUTURE TRENDS
The above discussion highlights the various ways that the current generation 
of credential wallets can augment existing payment rails to improve trust in 
payments. In addition, there are a number of emerging trends that suggest that 
the boundary between payment wallets and credential wallets may become 
more porous over time. This additional convergence could come in the form 
of credential wallets adding native payment functionality, payment wallets 
encroaching into official government credentials, or some combination of both. 
One trend that is already evident is the gradual integration of official identity 
credentials into mainstream commercial wallets. For example, Apple’s recent 
integration of mobile driving licenses and passports into the Apple Wallet, and 
similar initiatives by Google and Samsung, show how device manufacturers are 
getting involved in a space that was traditionally reserved for government-led 
identity systems. 
Although these new official credentials are not yet widely accepted or governed 
by a comprehensive trust framework, this may also change. In the EU context, 
for example, the European Commission has explicitly left open the possibility 
that such commercial wallets could seek certification as EUDI Wallets if they 
meet the required standards for security, privacy, and user control.23 
23	 European Digital Identity Cooperation Group. 2025. European Digital Identity Wallet – Architecture and 
Reference Framework (ARF) Version 2.6.0,. https://eudi.dev/2.6.0/ 

47
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
In parallel, innovations in account-to-account payment schemes may create 
opportunities for deeper integration. As instant-payment systems mature and 
become more widely available, some jurisdictions are exploring “request-to-
pay” or “pull payment” mechanisms that may allow a wallet to trigger payments 
directly from a bank account. For example, in India, the UPI request-to-pay 
functionality allows a merchant or payee to initiate a request which appears in 
the payer’s UPI app, allowing them to review the transaction details and either 
authorize or reject the payment.24 Similar functionality is increasingly available in 
other jurisdictions as well.25
Another area of potential convergence involves leveraging the secure wallet 
environment for the actual transfer of value itself. In theory, a credential wallet 
could support value transfer using new forms of digital instruments—such 
as tokenized deposits, regulated stablecoins, central bank digital currencies 
(CBDCs), or purpose-bound payment tokens—allowing the transaction to be 
initiated, authorized, and completed entirely within a single wallet environment. 
Such models are at an early stage of development, and their relationship with 
existing payment rails is not yet clear. 
While it is too early to predict whether credential wallets and payment wallets will 
converge at the technical level, what is clear is that, from the user perspective, 
such convergence is inevitable. This can already be seen in the ways that 
technology companies are binding together multiple wallets into a single, 
integrated user interface. For more details of how this works for one illustrative 
example (the current Apple Wallet), please see Annex.
Future convergence between credential wallets and payments will continue to 
play out within this complex landscape. Decades of established technology, 
regulatory frameworks, commercial agreements, and merchant acceptance 
networks will affect the trajectory of future changes. Any new models will need 
to address issues of trust, user experience, liability allocation, commercial 
viability, and regulatory compliance, among other constraints. The evolution of 
wallet architectures is likely to proceed incrementally and dialectically, shaped by 
ongoing interaction between governments, PSPs, and technology companies, 
and influenced by the preferences of users. 
24	 National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), “BHIM UPI.” https://www.bhimupi.org.in/ 
25	 SEPA Request-to-Pay: https://www.europeanpaymentscouncil.eu/what-we-do/other-schemes/sepa-
request-pay 

Risks and 
challenges 
3

49
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
Challenges
Despite the many advantages of digital wallets, several challenges remain that 
must be addressed to ensure they fulfill their full potential. 
First, the modular nature of the wallets’ architectural paradigm inherently 
creates some complexity, given the complementary roles of various ecosystem 
participants, such as credential issuers, wallet providers, and trust service 
providers. Unlike traditional centralized digital identity models, in which all of 
these roles might have been played by a single entity, implementing a wallet 
ecosystem requires active orchestration among actors. Although there are 
many benefits to this orchestration, such as scalability and fewer duplicative 
investments, operationalizing such an ecosystem can introduce some initial 
setup complexities and an ongoing governance overhead.
Another potential challenge is credential revocation. Just like a traditional physical 
credential, once a digital credential is digitally signed and issued into a wallet, it is 
presumed to remain valid until its expiration date. However, some use cases may 
require a dynamic way to be able to verify that credentials are still valid and have 
not been revoked by their issuer, to ensure they can be trusted. For example, a 
traffic police officer may need to check that a driving license is still valid. While it 
is possible to dynamically consult a revocation list, this adds complexity, requires 
an internet connection, and can affect the perceived privacy protections of these 
systems. Particularly in privacy-focused wallet designs that avoid continuous 
connectivity with credential issuers (to protect user privacy), it is not always clear 
how to effectively manage credential revocation, and there is not yet a clear 
consensus or standardized approach for this.
Another key challenge is inclusivity. Even in higher-income countries, not 
everyone has a smartphone or feels comfortable using one. This challenge is 
exacerbated for vulnerable groups and lower-income populations who may not 
be able to afford a smartphone. Such groups still need to receive services, and 
the lack of a digital wallet should not be allowed to become an access barrier. 
There are ways to leverage some of the benefits of verifiable credentials even 
without a smartphone. Digital wallets can be implemented on other types of devices, 
such as chip-enabled ID cards, on SIM cards, or in cloud-based environments 
accessed remotely,26 including through a feature phone interface.27 While these 
interfaces may have tradeoffs in terms of usability compared to smartphones, they 
can provide useful alternatives for some use cases and user populations. 
26 Panagiota Stamatopoulou et al., “wwWallet.org: A Cloud-Based Non-custodial Digital Identity Wallet,” 
EPiC Series in Computing 105 (2025): 136–145, Proceedings of EUNIS 2024 Annual Congress in Athens, 
https://easychair.org/publications/paper/D4m4/open.
27 Impression Signatures. https://www.impression-signatures.com/pages/e-signatures 

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
50
It should also be noted that verifiable credentials can also be implemented 
without a wallet. This strategy has been used in Benin, where the national ID 
card is printed with a QR code containing a digital version of the card, encoded 
using the W3C verifiable credential data model, which can be verified digitally 
by scanning the code with an appropriate device. This allows the same level 
of verification of the authenticity of the credential as a wallet-based credential. 
What this workflow does not permit is authentication of the identity of the 
credential holder. In practice, this means that such credentials are not digital IDs 
(in the sense that they cannot be used to access services online). But they do 
offer a robust way to digitally authenticate the document itself and ensure it is 
not a fake and enable a visual in-person identity verification workflow, similar to 
what is done with a traditional ID card. This utility of such a design is thus limited 
compared to a credential issued into a digital wallet and bound to a specific user, 
but it can still be a useful alternative for certain populations and use cases.
Risks
One of the main promises of wallets is that, by putting users at the center of 
data-sharing decisions, they will empower users by giving them control over 
their data. 
However, this promise relies on a number of assumptions, for example about 
the digital skills of the user and their ability to make informed decisions about 
their own data. Users with limited digital literacy, inadequate access to modern 
devices, or lower familiarity with digital services may struggle to navigate all 
of the options that wallets provide them. If users struggle to create verifiable 
presentations or manage their consent preferences, rather than empowering 
them, wallets could unintentionally increase their vulnerability or risk of exclusion. 
More generally, by putting users at the center of a data sharing transaction, wallets 
can facilitate the use of consent as a legal basis for sharing and processing 
personal data. While this certainly has benefits, it also has the potential for 
overapplication. There is a risk that over-reliance on user consent as a basis for 
data sharing can lead to a phenomenon called “consent fatigue,” where consent 
requests become so frequent that users stop considering them carefully.28 
Frequent consent prompts can overwhelm even the most digitally savvy users, 
making it difficult for them to make informed decisions about their data. By 
28	 Abrusio, J. (2024). The (In)Efficacy of Consent for the Processing of Personal Data. Humanities and 
Rights Global Network Journal, 6(1). https://www.humanitiesandrights.com/journal/index.php/har/article/
view/133/102 

51
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
placing an undue burden on people to manage complex privacy considerations 
just to access everyday services, the empowerment benefits of wallets could be 
undermined, and users could have greater exposure to data misuse if consent 
fatigue leads to suboptimal data-sharing decisions. For more discussion on the 
role of consent in authorizing data sharing, readers are referred to the companion 
policy note, Consent Management: Empowering People Over Their Data.29
Future Trends
A number of emerging technologies may help mitigate these risks in the 
future and help wallets fulfill their promise of user empowerment. Integration 
of AI agents into wallets could mitigate some of these risks and challenges, in 
particular by reducing consent fatigue by automating routine decisions, and 
automating routine choices based on predefined user preferences. AI-powered 
assistants could also help users understand how their data is being used, for 
example by simplifying complex consent forms by translating legal jargon into 
intuitive language.
In addition to AI, complementary reforms, including legal and regulatory 
adjustments, could also help alleviate consent fatigue by promoting standardized 
and simplified consent frameworks, such as standardized and structured 
consent forms. These could improve transparency, enable automation of 
consent management, and support dynamic revocation, helping users manage 
their data sharing preferences more effectively, and taking power back from data 
recipients and putting control in the hands of data subjects.
Whatever improvements the future brings, the advantage of the wallet paradigm 
is that it will be able to accommodate these changes. A key benefit of the 
standardized, modular, and interoperable nature of wallets is the ability to scale to 
new features and functionality without redesigning the entire ecosystem. Wallets 
and modular credentials provide a stable foundation upon which advanced 
capabilities—including AI agents—can be built in as those technologies mature. 
Similarly, just because wallet architectures enable consent-based data-sharing 
workflows does not mean that consent must be used as the exclusive legal basis 
for all data processing involving wallets, and as data protection frameworks 
continue to evolve, additional protections may be integrated to complement the 
user-centric controls that wallets natively offer. 
29	 Tullis, Christopher and Beatriz Botero Arcila (2026), “Consent Management: Empowering People Over 
Their Data”. World Bank Group. (Forthcoming)

Conclusion

53
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
D
igital wallets represent more than just a new form factor for digital 
identity—they signal a shift in how DPI can be organized: modular, 
user-centric, standards-based, and interoperable by design. Like 
other DPI components—or the internet itself—digital wallets are 
not a single “solution,” but an infrastructure upon which countless solutions 
can be built. At scale, successful wallet ecosystems will not be defined by the 
technology alone, but by the institutions, standards, and users that enable these 
technologies to be deployed in a trusted way to solve real-world problems.
This note argues that the wallet paradigm changes three things at once. 
Technically, it introduces a clear separation between credentials and the wallet 
that stores and presents them, supported by a common trust infrastructure. 
Institutionally, it realigns roles and responsibilities across issuers, wallet providers, 
verifiers, and trust service providers, allowing each to focus on their comparative 
advantages. And functionally, it enables new ways of delivering services by 
bringing together digital identity, user-centric data sharing, electronic signatures, 
and (increasingly) payments within a coherent, user-controlled environment.
Reframing digital identity around credentials and wallets, rather than monolithic 
identity providers, can allow digital wallet ecosystems to scale more broadly 
and seamlessly than traditional digital identity and data sharing infrastructure. 
Credentials can be issued by multiple authoritative sources and reused across 
sectors and borders; wallets provide a common, user-centric interface for 
presenting them; and verifiers no longer need bespoke integrations with every 
data source they rely on. The same architecture underpins more privacy-
preserving data sharing (through selective disclosure), more seamless signing 
workflows, and a range of payment-adjacent use cases such as onboarding, 
KYC, confirmation of payee, and proof of eligibility.
At the same time, digital wallets should not be seen as a panacea. Modular 
architectures bring their own challenges: coordinating multiple roles, designing 
and operating trust frameworks, managing credential revocation at scale, and 
ensuring inclusive access for people who may lack smartphones or digital skills. 
In the payment domain in particular, convergence with wallet infrastructures 
will be shaped by powerful incumbents, deeply embedded trust and liability 
frameworks, and long-standing user habits. Any realistic vision of convergence 
must acknowledge this path dependence and the need for new solutions to 
complement, or otherwise deliver clear additional value over, the status quo.
In conclusion, several strategic implications for governments and other 
ecosystem actors can be highlighted:

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
54
•	Digital wallets need not replace other types of digital identity. Just 
as digital IDs have not replaced physical ID cards, digital wallets can 
coexist with alternative digital identity solutions that may have continued 
relevance. Parallel channels will remain necessary for inclusivity, legacy 
processes, and resilience. The goal is to expand choice and improve user 
experience where wallets offer clear benefits, not to make other models 
obsolete overnight.
•	Build on existing assets and capabilities. Many countries already have 
digital ID systems, government portals, open-banking arrangements, or 
sectoral data-sharing platforms. These should be seen as starting points, 
not obstacles. Evolving them toward wallet-compatible standards and 
patterns can reduce cost and risk while leveraging existing brands, user 
bases, and institutional capacity.
•	Leverage established standards whenever possible. Digital wallet 
implementations today benefit from an increasingly mature ecosystem 
of mutually reinforcing and complementary standards. Adopting these 
standards when feasible can improve security, enhance interoperability, 
and allow access to existing software and vendor ecosystems. Leveraging 
these mature standards bases as much as possible can allow governments 
to avoid reinventing the wheel, while promoting local industry and providing 
for current and future interoperability.
•	Add new features as needed. A national wallet ecosystem does not 
need to launch as a fully integrated “super app.” In many contexts, early 
wallet deployments may focus narrowly on digital identity and essential 
verifiable credentials. Over time, additional application-layer functions (like 
electronic signatures or payments) or features (like digital service access 
or AI agents) can be incorporated. But these should be added if and when 
justified by user needs, institutional capacity, and overall maturity of the 
ecosystem. 
Looking ahead, wallet ecosystems will evolve alongside other technological 
and regulatory trends. AI-enabled assistants may help users navigate complex 
consent choices or automate routine decisions. New payment instruments—such 
as tokenized deposits, regulated stablecoins, or CBDCs—may leverage wallet 
infrastructures for secure value transfer. Data-protection regimes will continue to 
shape how consent, purpose limitation, and accountability are implemented in 
practice. The advantage of the wallet model is that it provides a stable, modular 
foundation on top of which these capabilities can be added over time, without 
repeatedly rebuilding the entire stack.

55
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm

Annex

57
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
Credential and 
Payment Wallets
This annex compares the current state of digital credential wallets—which 
manage cryptographically verifiable credentials containing personal data of 
various types, including identity attributes—with the current state of payment 
wallets. For simplicity, the text uses Apple Pay as a representative example 
of a modern consumer payment wallet and contrasts it with current digital 
credential wallets (discussed in the main body of this paper). Examples of the 
latter include Ukraine’s Diia, a government-provided identity wallet, as well as 
Apple’s own Apple Wallet, which integrates identity and other credentials within 
the same application. (For analytical clarity, complementary functions that these 
applications integrate at the application layer—such as electronic signing—are 
not considered here.)
The Apple Wallet application illustrates a unified smartphone interface that 
presents both a payment wallet (Apple Pay) and a credential wallet in a single 
app. From the user’s perspective, payment tokens (digital representations of 
payment cards) coexist with various identity and non-payment credentials (such 
as driving licenses, passports, boarding passes, or loyalty cards). This Apple 
Wallet user interface is shown in Figure 11.
Despite this front-end integration, the underlying technologies, protocols, and 
data flows for payments and credentials remain fundamentally distinct. Although 
largely hidden from users, the Apple Wallet, as currently implemented, relies on 
separate technical pathways and security domains for payments and credentials. 
Payment tokens are stored in a hardware Secure Element and use EMV-based 
cryptographic processes, whereas identity and other credentials rely on different 
data structures, security keys, and trust frameworks. This separation is due, in 
part, to the need to align the payments elements of the Apple Wallet with the 
constraints of the existing trust frameworks in place for card payments and the 
limitations of widespread POS payment infrastructure. These differences are 
illustrated at a high level in Figure 12, with additional detail in Table 5.

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
58
FIGURE 11. Apple Wallet user interface 
Source: Apple
This schema represents only the current state of payment and credential 
wallets, through the lens of their integration within the context of one particular 
commercial product. It should not be interpreted as normative, or as implying that 
further innovation, integration, or convergence may not change how credentials 
and payments interact in the future.
Indeed, substantial innovation is expected in the coming years as governments, 
technology companies, and financial service providers seek to improve user 
experience, strengthen security, and position themselves within evolving digital 
ecosystems. Multiple government- and industry-led initiatives are ongoing to 
explore new models for data sharing and payment authorization, to help integrate 
and extend trust between the identity and payments domains. Some discussion 
of potential future trends can be found in the main body of this paper.
In the European Union, for example, several Large Scale Pilots (LSPs) have 
been launched to test how different use cases—including payments—can 
be integrated into the EUDI Wallet framework.30 A first round of four pilots, 
30	 European Commission. 2025. What are the Large Scale Pilot Projects – EU Digital Identity Wallet. https://
ec.europa.eu/digital-building-blocks/sites/spaces/EUDIGITALIDENTITYWALLET/pages/694487808/
What+are+the+Large+Scale+Pilot+Projects 

59
Digital Wallets: A New Paradigm
FIGURE 12. Apple Wallet data flows for payments and credentials 
Card info sent to bank
USER
USAGE
ONBOARDING
Bank
Credential
Issuer
eCommerce 
Server
Service 
Provider
Relying Party
Apple Wallet
DAN stored on device
Credential presented
Credential issued
User authenticates 
on device sends 
DAN to eCommerce 
Server
DAN shared 
with Bank to 
confirm 
payment
conducted from 2023 to 2025, explored authentication and authorization flows 
for traditional payment instruments (such as card-based payments) within 
broader EUDI Wallet–based workflows.31 Since the closure of this first round 
of pilots, a subsequent round has begun. This new phase aims to build on 
lessons and outcomes from earlier work while broadening the scope to include 
additional use cases as well as to explore alternative payment approaches to 
those based on traditional card payment infrastructure, including account-
to-account, instant-payment models.32 These and any subsequent rounds of 
piloting will inform the relationship between payments and credentials in future 
generations of digital wallets in the EU.
31	 NOBID Consortium (Nordic-Baltic eID Wallet Consortium). Piloted EUDI Wallet payment use cases 
including Strong Customer Authentication (SCA), payment-token provisioning, and card-based payment 
flows under the EU’s first round of Large Scale Pilots (2023–2024). See: https://nobidconsortium.com
32	 WE BUILD Consortium. The recently-launched WE BUILD consortium is implementing a second found of 
LSPs intended to span from 2024–2027, focusing on business wallets, payments integration, and data-
sharing use cases. See: https://www.webuildconsortium.eu/ 

Digital Wallet Policy Note Series, No. 1
60
TABLE 5. Data models and flows for payment and credential wallets compared
Feature
Digital Payment 
Wallets
Digital Credential Wallets
Primary Data
Payment tokens
Identity credentials and personal 
documents
Primary Use
Paying for a good or 
service
Proving identity or eligibility for a service
Technology 
Rail
EMV-based 
tokenization33 
Existing card networks 
(e.g. Visa, Mastercard, 
domestic schemes)
Verifiable credentials based on data 
verified against a trusted authoritative 
source
Core Security 
Data
Device Account 
Number (DAN)34
Per-transaction 
Dynamic Cryptogram
Private keys used by users to digitally sign 
verifiable presentations
Digital signatures generated during 
credential issuance to protect integrity of 
verifiable credentials 
Data Shared 
(Transaction)
DAN 
Dynamic Cryptogram
Note: underlying card 
number not revealed 
to the merchant
Per-transaction verifiable presentations: 
specific subset of data found across the 
verifiable credentials stored in the wallet
Note: User may choose to limit data 
shared, e.g. “Over 18 years old”
Storage 
Location
Secure Element 
(physically isolated 
hardware chip)
For sensitive data (e.g. private keys):
•	Secure Element (physically isolated 
hardware chip on smartphone)
•	Cloud-based Hardware Security 
Module (physically isolated hardware 
storage in data center)
For less sensitive data (e.g. event tickets): 
•	Protected smartphone storage (logically 
isolated smartphone storage) 
33	 EMVCo, “The What, Why and How of EMV Payment Tokenisation,” EMVCo Knowledge Hub, n.d., https://www.emvco.com/
knowledge-hub/the-what-why-and-how-of-emv-payment-tokenisation/ 
34	 Apple Inc., “Apple Pay.” https://www.apple.com/apple-pay/ 


