This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     1 
 
 
 
Preprint Notes 
This is a self-archived version of a published article. This version may differ from the published 
version in pagination and typographic details. 
 
 
 
Title: Towards a Trustful Digital World: Exploring Self-Sovereign Identity Ecosystems 
Authors: Gabriella Laatikainen, Taija Kolehmainen, Mengcheng Li, Markus Hautala, Antti Kettunen 
and Pekka Abrahamsson 
Year: 2021 
Please cite this article as follows: 
Laatikainen, Gabriella; Kolehmainen, Taija; Li, Mengcheng; Hautala, Markus; Kettunen, Antti; and 
Abrahamsson, Pekka, "Towards a Trustful Digital World: Exploring Self-Sovereign Identity 
Ecosystems" (2021). PACIS 2021 Proceedings. 19. https://aisel.aisnet.org/pacis2021/19 

This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     2 
 
TOWARDS A TRUSTFUL DIGITAL WORLD: 
EXPLORING SELF-SOVEREIGN IDENTITY 
ECOSYSTEMS 
Completed Research Paper 
Gabriella Laatikainen 
Faculty of Information Technology 
University of Jyväskylä, Finland 
gabriella.laatikainen@jyu.fi 
 
Taija Kolehmainen 
Faculty of Information Technology 
University of Jyväskylä, Finland 
taija.s.kolehmainen@jyu.fi 
 
Mengcheng Li 
Faculty of Information Technology 
University of Jyväskylä, Finland 
mengcheng.m.li@jyu.fi 
 
Markus Hautala 
TietoEVRY 
Espoo, Finland 
markus.hautala@tietoevry.com 
Antti Kettunen 
TietoEVRY 
Espoo, Finland 
antti.j.kettunen @tietoevry.com 
Pekka Abrahamsson 
Faculty of Information Technology 
University of Jyväskylä, Finland 
pekka.abrahamsson@jyu.fi 
 
Abstract 
In the current global situation—burdened by, among others, a vast number of people 
without formal identification, digital leap, the need for health passports and contact 
tracking applications—providing private and secure digital identity for individuals, 
organizations and other entities is crucial. The emerging self-sovereign identity (SSI) 
solutions rely on distributed ledger technologies and verifiable credentials and have 
the potential to enable trustful digital interactions. In this human-centric paradigm, 
trust among actors can be established in a decentralized manner while the identity 
holders are able to own and control their confidential data. In this paper, we build on 
observations gathered in a field study to identify the building blocks, antecedents and 
possible outcomes of SSI ecosystems. We also showcase opportunities for researchers 
and practitioners to investigate this phenomenon from a wide range of domains and 
theories, such as the digital innovation ecosystems, value co-creation, surveillance 
theory, or entrepreneurship theories. 
Keywords:  Decentralized identity, Self-sovereign identity, Innovation ecosystems,  
Digital trust 
 
Introduction 
In the current global situation, the need to provide individuals and other entities a secure and private 
digital identity has been accentuated. More than a billion people lack a formal identity that would give 
them access to a variety of services, such as financial services, education, healthcare and several aid 
programs (Ladner et al., 2016). The refugee crisis in Europe left several people without formal 
documents, causing data management challenges in recipient countries, such as privacy and security 
issues of centralized databases that store sensitive biometrics and biographical data (Lemieux, 2017). 

This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     3 
 
The pandemic crisis has accelerated the digitalization and forced individuals, organizations and 
governments to use digital systems without careful considerations of the users’ data security and privacy 
(Morley et al., 2020). We live our lives by leaving our rapidly growing digital footprints without giving 
informed consent for the (re-)use of our data in all cases (Cinnamon, 2017). In fighting against 
infectious disease outbreaks, governments and other authorities face challenges in assessing the ethical 
justifiability of digital applications that use sensitive users’ data to stop the spread of the virus and 
ensure privacy, fair data sharing, responsible data use, discrimination, freedom of movement and 
voluntariness (Morley et al., 2020; Sharon, 2020). Indeed, the question of how to identify individuals, 
what data to collect about them, where these data should be stored, who owns and controls the data, is 
a complex, timely, and important matter. 
Self-sovereign identity (SSI) solutions promise a trustful, private and secure way of digital identity 
management, offering new insights into the above mentioned problems (Mühle et al., 2018). In currently 
used centralized and federated identity management systems services, organizations and platform 
providers provide the users various digital identifiers and identification means and require the users to 
trust their systems (Mühle et al., 2018; Grüner et al., 2019). The concept of SSI relies on the concepts 
of decentralized identity that take advantage of distributed ledger technologies (a broader class of 
“blockchain-inspired” technology; Zachariadis et al., 2019) and verifiable credentials (i.e., a tamper-
evident credential that has authorship and can be cryptographically verified; W3C, 2020) to provide the 
users digital identity in a decentralized manner without relying on intermediaries (i.e., trusted third 
parties; Naik and Jenkins, 2020). As a distinction to decentralized identity systems, the SSI paradigm 
has additional requirements that ensure the users’ sovereignty of their identity and the storage-control 
of the associated confidential data linked to their identity (Naik and Jenkins, 2020) and thus, might offer 
a new digital identity infrastructure for the post-industrial age. 
Besides providing digital identity for individuals, SSI systems have the potential to create new and 
transform existing organizational processes in a variety of industries by providing digital identity to 
other entities, such as organizations and things (e.g., IoT devices or cars; Lemineux, 2017). For 
example, apart from reforming the authentication and authorization processes, SSI systems enable 
proving the steps of a journey of physical and digital things in a supply chain; they might eliminate the 
privacy and identification concerns related to patient data in digital healthcare systems, and might 
establish trustful value transfer and communication with partners, customers and regulators in business 
ecosystems (Zwitter et al., 2020). SSI systems can also enable the emergence of new business models, 
such as the identity insurance schemes, and the emergence of value-stable cryptocurrencies 
(“stablecoins”) that function as local currencies (Wang and De Filippi, 2020). 
Despite their potential benefits, transforming existing processes and orchestrating new digital identity 
ecosystems carry several challenges, such as the fragmentation of the SSI market, lack of standards and 
regulations, the immaturity of the technology, legal uncertainty, and challenges related to decentralized 
governance (Lemieux 2017; Wang and De Filippi, 2020; Prewett et al., 2020). These challenges 
question the feasibility of the SSI ecosystems and as such, require further investigations. 
Due to the nascent nature of SSI technology and their ecosystems, our current understanding of the 
phenomenon is limited. There are a few studies investigating the technology aspects of SSI (e.g., Mühle 
et al., 2018; Naik and Jenkins, 2020; Dunphy and Petitcolas, 2018), user requirements (e.g., Ostern and 
Cabinakova, 2019), trust requirements (e.g., Grüner et al., 2020), philosophical and legal perspectives 
of identity (Zwitter et al., 2020) and cases of the real-world adoption of SSI (e.g., Wang and De Filippi, 
2020). However, there is a need for studies that would lay the foundations for theory development and 
advance our understanding on blockchain-related technologies and related concepts (Rossi et al., 2019). 
In particular, SSI requires investigation from a holistic view (Gstrein and Kochenov, 2020) and we lack 
studies that take a more comprehensive view and study SSI from an ecosystem perspective.  
To address this gap, in this study, we describe the results of a field study carried out in close 
collaboration with (1) a partner company aiming to orchestrate a digital identity infrastructure, as well 
as (2) several domain experts who are contributing members in a standard setting organization (i.e., the 
TrustOverIP Foundation; ToIP, 2021). We aim to answer the following research question: “How can 
SSI ecosystems be defined, and what are the antecedents and possible outcomes of their orchestration 
and adoption?”. We base our results on our observations as well as interviews with key domain experts. 

This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     4 
 
The contribution of this study is two-fold. First, we aim to narrow the gap between researchers and 
practitioners and propose a model that describes the building blocks of SSI ecosystems, their potential 
outcomes, as well as the factors that have an impact on their characteristics, orchestration and possible 
adoption (i.e., antecedents). Second, we propose further research avenues from the viewpoint of several 
research domains and theories that might facilitate the adoption and orchestration of SSI ecosystems.  
Self-Sovereign Identity Ecosystems 
SSI is an emerging concept that can be viewed as (1) an identity management system, (2) a human-
centric data management paradigm or (3) an identity protocol. First, as opposed to the central identity 
management system, SSI is a decentralized identity management system that enables individuals and 
other entities to manage their identity and personal data associated with their identities by storing them 
locally on their own devices (or remotely on a distributed network) and selectively give access to 
authorized third parties, without the need to refer to any trusted intermediary to provide or validate these 
claims (Mühle et al., 2018). Second, SSI can be viewed as a human-centric data management paradigm 
where the users own and control their identity and the personal data associated to their identity (Naik 
and Jenkins, 2020). Third, SSI can be considered as an identity protocol, a commodity providing private, 
secure and trustworthy data storage and communication (Zwitter et al., 2020). 
Although the concepts of SSI and decentralized identity are typically used interchangeably, there is no 
consensus in the literature and among experts on the definition of SSI. However, there is a general 
understanding that SSI “is intended to preserve the right for the selective disclosure of different aspects 
of one’s identity and the various components thereof, in different domains and contextual settings.” 
(Wang and De Filippi, 2020, page 9). In other words, SSI refers to decentralized identity with additional 
requirements that can be used to assess SSI solutions. Self-sovereign identities should be secure (i.e., 
the identity must be kept secure), controllable (i.e., the user must be in control of who can view and 
access their data), and portable (i.e., the user must be able to use their identity data wherever they want 
and the data should not be tied to a single provider) (Allen, 2016). It should be noted that the assumption 
that an SSI solution fulfils all requirements, is not fully plausible (Wang and De Filippi, 2020).  
There are several non-profit organizations, open source communities and standard setting 
organizations 1  aiming to define, standardise and provide tools for the decentralized identity 
architectures and the digital interactions that these enable. Despite the existence of laws and regulations 
related to digital identification, data exchange and protection (e.g., eIDAS, Pan-Canadian Trust 
Framework, GDPR) there is still legal and regulatory uncertainty in the global market. While there is 
currently no global standard for SSI implementations, the most prevalent elements of SSI technology 
is proposed by the World Wide Web Consortium 2 (W3C, 2020) and the Decentralized Identity 
Foundation 3(DIF, 2021). The concept of SSI Ecosystem has been promoted by a standard setting 
organization, the TrustOverIP Foundation 4  (ToIP, 2021). While other decentralized identity 
communities concentrate on some of the aspects of SSI systems (e.g., technological) or some of the 
industries (e.g., healthcare), this standard setting organization focuses on “internet-scale” (i.e., cross-
country and pan-industry) SSI solutions and the ecosystems built around the technology. 
According to W3C and DIF standards, the key components of currently developed decentralized 
identity management systems are the decentralized identities (DIDs; DID, 2021) and a secure, private 
and encryption-based communication protocol called DIDComm (DIDComm, 2021). DIDs are URL-
based identifiers ensuring the portability of the credentials without the need to reissue the credential 
(DID, 2021). They are used in combination with verifiable credentials and verifiable claims that provide 
the possibility to make any number of attestations about a DID subject that grant access to rights and 
 
1 These include, for example, the World Wide Web Consortium, Decentralized Identity Foundation, Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), 
TrustOverIP Foundation, MyData, Sovrin, OASIS, OpenID, FIDO Alliance, Hyperledger, Open Identity Exchange, CULedger, Alastria, 
uPort, Civic, SelfKey, Alastria, and Global ID. 
2 The W3C is supported by major internet and technology companies, universities and governments, such as Amazon, Apple, Boeing, Cisco, 
Microsoft, Google, Facebook, Alibaba, Tencent, and Baidu. 
3 The DIF is supported by most of major blockchain identity and data companies, such as Microsoft, IBM, Hyperledger, Accenture, 
Mastercard, RSA, Civic, uPort, BigChainDB and Sovrin. 
4 The TrustOverIP Foundation was founded in May 2020 and aims to combine the open standards, architectures, and protocols developed in 
other standard setting organizations and technical development partners. Currently, it has more than 150 members, with steering members 
such as IBM, British Columbia, Accenture, Evernym, Finicity, CULedger, Futurewei, LG CNS and IdRamp. 

This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     5 
 
privileges to trusted authorities (Dunphy and Petitcolas, 2018). The DIDComm specifies the 
communication between DIDs such as connecting and maintaining relationships and issuing credentials, 
providing proof, and its design is aimed to be secure, private, interoperable, transport-agnostic and 
extensible (DIDComm, 2021; Windley, 2020). DIDComm has been supported by libraries, agents, 
applications implemented in different languages, such as Python, .NET, GoLang (DIDComm, 2021).  
SSI solutions are typically built and managed by a collaborative effort among different actors forming 
an ecosystem (Wang and De Filippi, 2020). Technically, digital identification can be established 
through the interaction of three roles that together form “the digital trust triangle” (ToIP, 2021; Davie 
et al., 2019): issuers, holders and verifiers. Issuers are the source of credentials; they determine what 
credentials to issue, what the credential means, and how they validate the information assigned to the 
credential. Holders request credentials from issuers; they hold and present them when requested by 
verifiers and approved by the holder. Holders can be individuals, organizations, or other entities. 
Verifiers request the credentials they need and then follow their own policy to verify their authenticity 
and validity. This “triangle” is managed by a governance authority that may represent any set of issuers 
organized in different forms (for example, government, consortia, cooperative). The role of governance 
authorities is to publish a governance framework that consists of rules for managing the ecosystem, in 
particular the business, legal, and technical policies for issuing, holding, and verifying the credentials. 
As an example, in a payment card ecosystem (e.g., Mastercard), the governance authority is Mastercard, 
the issuers are the banks and credit unions, the holders are the individuals or businesses applying for 
Mastercard, and the verifiers are merchants enrolled in the Mastercard ecosystem to accept payment 
cards. (ToIP, 2021) 
In SSI ecosystems, the trust among actors is established through peer-to-peer interactions assured by 
(1) the technology that provides immutable and secure data storage, data exchange and communication 
and by (2) the governance frameworks consisting of business, legal, and technical rules and policies 
(Davie et al., 2019; ToIP, 2021). Thus, SSI solutions refer not only to a technological solution, but also 
require a governance framework, and these two components are interrelated (see, e.g. Zwitter et al., 
2020). Thus, in this study, we chose SSI ecosystems as the unit of analysis, which allowed us to study 
SSI from a holistic perspective. 
Research Method 
The emergence of SSI ecosystems is a rather new phenomenon where changes in technology and in the 
market happen rapidly. To bridge the gap between practitioners and researchers, we chose an 
exploratory qualitative approach that is capable to encompass empirically rich and detailed data related 
to a nascent complex phenomenon based on human actions (Edmondson and McManus, 2007; Myers, 
2009). We gathered the data by conducting field research. Field research involves collecting data in 
form of variable methods, such as direct observation, participation in the life of the community, 
interaction with community members, collective discussions and analyses of documents produced 
within the community. (Myers, 2009) 
The study was carried out between April 2020 and March 2021. In this study, we collaborated closely 
with an IT service provider company in form of a research project. This company has been developing 
a decentralized identity infrastructure in collaboration with other private and public organizations. As a 
part of this work, we joined a standard setting organization, the TrustOverIP Foundation (for a short 
description, please refer to section Self-Sovereign Identity Ecosystems, footnote 4; ToIP, 2021) as 
contributing members. Being an active member of the community made it possible to connect with 
several key domain experts and observe the SSI ecosystems in real context. During the field work, we 
focused on investigating the main characteristics of these ecosystems, the drivers and challenges of their 
development and adoption, and the behavioural foundations of the contributing experts.  
Data collection 
The data for this research has been collected from several sources. First, we actively collaborated with 
our partner company in form of project meetings, emails and informal discussions related to 
orchestrating a particular decentralized identity ecosystem. Second, one of the authors actively 
participated in TrustOverIP meetings, email conversations, and informal discussions related to the 

This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     6 
 
following tasks: (1) contributing to the human experience task force, and (2) creating a survey for 
TrustOverIP community to understand the current state-of-practice of SSI adoption, benefits, and 
barriers. Third, to advance our understanding of the phenomenon, we participated in webinars and 
university lectures given by domain experts. Fourth, we actively followed news, social media postings, 
and the conversations of the TrustOverIP community via Slack. We collected insights from the websites 
of several companies, non-profit organization, standard setting organizations that are relevant in this 
domain. The most important events are listed in Table 1; however, the authors have had earlier 
experience with other blockchain-related research and empirical work that are not included as a form 
of data collection for this particular study. 
Table 1. List of events. 
Events 
Duration 
Project meetings with our collaborative partner  
and research group meetings 
36 meetings with an average of  
60 minutes 
Active participation in TrustOverIP meetings  
5 meetings of cca. 60 minutes  
Active participation on webinars and university lecture given by key domain 
experts  
6 webinars/lectures sum. cca. 440 
minutes  
Summary 
50 hours 20 minutes  
We systematically gathered our observations for further analysis in the form of field notes in several 
ways. First, we listed our observations in the format of date, source, person, and observation/key insight. 
Second, we took screen captures about important presentations and meetings. Third, we recorded some 
relevant parts of the meetings with the consent of the participants. Fourth, we extracted relevant 
information from Slack chat records, the chat history of the webinars, lectures, presentation slides and 
websites.  
Working together with field experts and observing their work closely allowed us to understand the 
phenomenon in general. However, we wanted to get insights into some more specific questions in depth, 
and thus, as an additional data source, we carried out ten in-depth interviews with experts from The 
United States of America, Canada, and Finland. These interviews followed an open-ended interview 
structure (Darke et al., 1998) and their length varied between 36–68 minutes. These were two group 
interviews and eight individual interviews. All interviews were recorded and transcribed. Table 2 
provides an overview of the informants. 
Table 2. List of informants. 
Interviewee 
Organization/Institution 
Type 
Position at the 
Organization/ 
Institution 
Other affiliations 
Number of 
interviews 
Interviewee 
1  
IT Service Provider, 
Organization A  
Senior Blockchain 
Consultant 
MyData5 member 
2 group interviews 
and 1 individual 
interview 
Interviewee 
2  
IT Service Provider, 
Organization A 
Head of 
Innovation Center 
MyData member 
2 group interviews 
and 1 individual 
interview 
Interviewee 
3  
Public Digital Trust 
Service Provider 
(government),  
Institution B 
Executive Director 
Executive Director of the 
TrustOverIP Foundation  
1 group interview 
Interviewee 
4  
Provider of Platform for 
Verifiable Credentials, 
Organization C 
Chief Trust 
Officer 
TrustOverIP Steering 
Committee Member, W3C DID 
Co-editor, Sovrin6 Co-Chair, 
OpenID Foundation7 Founding 
Board member, Identity 
Commons8 Steward 
1 group interview 
 
5 https://mydata.org/  
6 https://sovrin.org/  
7 https://openid.net/ 
8 https://www.idcommons.org/ 

This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     7 
 
Interviewee 
5  
Innovative Consultant 
Services Provider, 
Organization D 
Founder and CEO 
TrustOverIP member 
2 individual 
interviews 
Interviewee 
6  
Innovative Consultant 
Services Provider, 
Organization E 
Consultant and 
Advisory 
TrustOverIP member, DIF 
contributor, Identity Defined 
Security Alliance9 Member, 
Sovrin Board Member 
1 individual 
interview 
Interviewee 
7  
- 
- 
TrustOverIP member, Sovrin 
member 
1 individual 
interview 
Interviewee 
8 
Certified Public 
Accountant, 
Cybersecurity Audits 
Organization F 
Cybersecurity 
Consulting Audit 
and Governance 
Executive 
TrustOverIP Working Group 
Co-Chair, Sovrin member, 
CULedger Board of Advisors 
member, Credential Master, 
Board of Advisors member 
1 individual 
interview 
Interviewee 
9 
Service and Infrastructure 
Provider, Bank 
Principle 
Technology 
Strategist 
MyData member 
1 individual 
interview 
Our interviewees were very active, contributing members in one or more standard setting organizations 
or other non-profit communities working in digital identity domain. Further, they have had work 
experience in digital identity domain for several years in distinct roles. Moreover, two of the 
interviewees were founders of the TrustOverIP Foundation. The diversity of the background of our 
interviewees made it possible to gather insights from different viewpoints. The interview questions were 
personalized around the viewpoints and key themes enlisted in Table 3.  
Table 3. Themes for the interviews. 
Viewpoint 
Key themes 
Open source 
communities and 
standard setting 
organizations 
− 
SSI ecosystems in general (e.g., definition, key terms) 
− 
The roadmap towards mass adoption  
− 
Challenges in the journey towards mass adoption 
− 
Possible indicators of success of the TrustOverIP Foundation 
− 
Reasons for founding the TrustOverIP Foundation 
Organizational 
perspective 
− 
Organizational factors impacting the SSI ecosystems 
− 
The perceived risks and benefits of SSI ecosystems 
− 
The key barriers in orchestrating and adopting SSI ecosystems 
− 
How customers and other partner companies perceive the value  
Individual perspective 
− 
Personal incentives to work in SSI domain and contribute  
− 
Personal objectives  
− 
The success indicators of the work related to SSI ecosystems 
Before the data analysis, we combined the data coming from different sources (field notes, interview 
transcriptions, etc.). We extracted the relevant information collected in video and picture formats into 
concise text. As a result, we had cca. 110 pages of relevant data. 
Data analysis 
In the data analysis, we used open coding, axial coding and theoretical coding to analyze the data 
systematically in an iterative manner. In the open coding phase, we summarized different parts of the 
text using succinct codes by applying the constant comparative method (Locke, 2002; Myers, 2009). 
We concentrated on identifying the aspects that appeared to have relevance to the phenomenon. In this 
phase, the coding was concrete, detailed and in most cases, followed the wording of the original text 
(Strauss and Corbin, 1994). This phase resulted in several codes, such as “trust in government”, 
“feasibility”, “interoperability”, “data policies”, “digital inclusion” and “self-esteem”. In the axial 
coding phase, we focused on finding regularities, patterns, explanations, and causalities between the 
codes. Based on our observations, we assigned the codes into broader categories using tables that 
represented different aspects of the phenomenon, such as “Organizational and institutional outcomes”, 
“Collaborative ecosystems” and “Industry characteristics”. In the theoretical coding phase, we focused 
on formulating a model that provides researchers and practitioners a holistic view of the phenomenon 
and helps to identify further research gaps (e.g., by focusing on some of the items, or, combining 
specific items and their interrelations). After some iterations, we found that the Antecedents-Concept-
 
9 https://www.idsalliance.org/ 

This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     8 
 
Outcome model fits the data and the purpose of the analysis very well. Thus, we assigned the categories 
into one of the following groups: (1) Building Blocks, (2) Antecedents and (3) Possible outcomes. 
Lastly, we carried out several discussions related to this model and its items both in our research group 
as well as with experts from our collaborative firm. In all phases of data analysis and validating 
discussions, we renamed, relocated, merged, deleted the codes several times to eliminate the 
illogicalities and repetitions. In the end, all authors agreed on the proposed model. 
SSI Ecosystems: Building Blocks, Antecedents and Potential Outcomes 
As a result of our study, we propose a model that describes the building blocks, antecedents, and 
possible outcomes of SSI ecosystems. In Figure 1 this model is shown with the categories and 
underlying codes that resulted from our data analysis. In the next three subsections, we describe these 
items in more detail; however, due to page limitations, we also put the results into context in the same 
subsection by referring to recent literature. 
  
Figure 1. SSI Ecosystems: Building Blocks, Antecedents, and Possible Outcomes. 
Building blocks of self-sovereign identity ecosystems 
We build on the definition of innovation ecosystems by Moore (1996) and define SSI Ecosystems as 
innovation ecosystems describing the collaborative effort of a diverse set of actors towards innovation. 
In these ecosystems, the key actors are the infrastructure providers delivering a technology and 
governance dual framework and various partner companies and end customers that provide 
complementary products and services as well as demands and capabilities. Based on our investigation, 
we argue that SSI Ecosystems consist of four components that need further elaboration when 
orchestrating or adopting a particular SSI ecosystem in practice. First, there is a need for proper 
conceptualization, such as defining the purpose, mission, context and boundary conditions. Second, 
there is a need for SSI infrastructure that consists of a technology and governance architecture. Third, 
SSI ecosystems need carefully crafted business models that provide fair value for each actor. Fourth, 
the orchestration and adoption of collaborative ecosystems requires designing and managing the roles, 
processes and activities and shaping an innovative culture and environment. In what follows, we 
describe these building blocks in more details. 
Conceptualization: SSI ecosystems need proper conceptualization, which can be achieved by defining 
their purpose and context, launch style and formative ideology (van Pelt et al., 2019; Hsieh et al., 2017). 
Digital identity in general, might refer to “all attributes of a person that uniquely defines the person”, 
whereas personas are specific facets of an identity that is expressed in a particular context (Wang et al., 
2020, pg. 2). The same persons might hold multiple personas in different contexts. Thus, orchestrating 
an SSI ecosystem requires not only defining the digital identity and the personas in this particular 
context, but also the required levels of digital trust and trust assurance (ToIP, 2021).  

This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     9 
 
Technology and Governance Dual - Framework: SSI solutions cannot be created without proper 
considerations of governance decisions (Zwitter et al., 2020). Thus, SSI solutions require both 
technology and governance frameworks that are interrelated and have to be defined side by side. When 
building digital identity ecosystems, the first step is to collect the business and policy requirements, and 
only then it is possible to choose the technologies and the components to implement these (ToIP, 2021). 
There are various proposed architectures under development that need further assessment (e.g. Civic, 
uPort). One possible SSI architecture has been proposed by Davie et al., (2019) that is developed and 
promoted by the TrustOverIP Foundation as a future standard (ToIP, 2021). This architecture consists 
of both technology and governance frameworks divided into four layers: the first two layers are 
responsible for technical trust (machine-to-machine) and the second bottom layers represent human 
trust (ToIP, 2021).  
Business Models: The business model of SSI ecosystems needs careful design and communication. 
The adoption of SSI solutions offers several benefits; however, it requires fundamental changes in 
existing legacy systems and business processes (Wang and De Filippi, 2020). Thus, the currently used 
business models might need to be fully redesigned, for example, by requiring transaction fees for 
credential use. Crafting a value proposition at the ecosystem level is very challenging and needs to 
consider different, mostly contradictory objectives of the actors (De Filippi and Loveluck, 2016). 
Another challenge is related to value justification, i.e., communicating the value to different actors in 
the ecosystem (see e.g., Töytäri et al., 2011). The potential benefits of SSI are typically visible only 
after a long time period, whereas adopting SSI requires significant start-up investments and taking high 
risks due to, for example, regulatory and legal uncertainty, lack of standards, lack of knowledge and 
skills and immature technology (Zwitter et al., 2020).  
Collaborative Ecosystems: SSI ecosystems consists of a set of different type of actors, such as private 
and public organizations, non-profit organizations, service providers, business customers and individual 
customers. SSI ecosystems are typically collaborative ecosystems where achieving good governance is 
especially challenging (Zachariadis et al., 2019; Lacity, 2018). The roles, rules and rights of the actors 
should be defined carefully in order to provide incentives and advance the actors’ engagement (van Pelt 
et al., 2019). Good governance can be defined and achieved in multiple ways (e.g., effective in decision 
making, conflict management, adaptation and change, effective in providing incentives; protecting the 
founders’ investment; Hsieh et al., 2017). In the forming/genesis phase, the role of a “hidden leader” 
has been accentuated (Lacity et al., 2019). In the operating phase, another challenge is related to the 
intention of collaborative actors that have impact in the ecosystem without having formal authority 
(Storbacka et al., 2016).  
Antecedents 
The characteristics, adoption and orchestration of SSI ecosystems are affected by several factors. In 
what follows, we describe these antecedents in more details. 
Environmental characteristics: SSI ecosystems reside in a highly uncertain environment 
characterized by high volatility, fast changes, and information asymmetry. The fragmented nature of 
SSI market, the immaturity and incompatibility of standards, legal and regulatory uncertainty have an 
impact on SSI ecosystems and their possible adoption.  
Cultural and country characteristics: Cultural and country characteristics are key antecedents of SSI 
ecosystems. For example, the potential benefits of an SSI solution aiming to achieve digital and 
financial inclusion are higher in developing countries; however, this implies additional challenges (e.g., 
citizens do not have smartphones to store their private keys securely; Wang and De Filippi, 2020). 
Furthermore, the diversity among countries related to, e.g., the citizens’ trust in governments, the 
processes and hierarchy in public sector, affects the individuals’ adoption behaviour and the 
requirements of the SSI solution. 
Industry characteristics: Industry characteristics, such as the level of automatization and required data 
sensitivity, influence the potential benefits and the associated risks of SSI ecosystem adoption. For 
example, the potential benefits in healthcare, insurance, or education might outweigh the required 
sacrifices, whereas in other industries, the perceived value of SSI ecosystem adoption remains too low. 

This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     10 
 
Organizational characteristics: Organizational characteristics, such as innovativeness, the 
organizational culture, the commitment and incentives of top management and the access to resources 
have a high impact on the decisions made related to SSI ecosystems.  
Role of expert communities, non-profit organizations and standard setting organizations: Open 
source communities, non-profit organizations and standard setting organizations play an important role 
in orchestrating SSI ecosystems. These communities offer a possibility to learn, get to know new people, 
obtain reputation and a brandname, and they can also increase the members’ self-esteem and feeling of 
usefulness. The digital identity community collaborates actively via different channels, such as 
meetings, Slack discussions, emails, social media posts, webinars and conferences.  
Individual characteristics: Individual characteristics, such as the skills, beliefs and resources of 
citizens or other individuals play an important role when studying the adoption of SSI ecosystems. 
Similarly, experts’ skills, networks, and commitment in organizational or community settings strongly 
influence the orchestration of these ecosystems.  
Possible outcomes 
SSI ecosystems offer a wide variety of outcomes that we describe in more details next.  
Societal and symbolic outcomes: SSI relies on a human-centric data management philosophy where 
the user is at the centre and there is no need for third parties to issue and administer an identity (Dunphy 
and Petitcolas, 2018). Thus, the perceived value of these ecosystems has a societal and symbolic 
dimension. SSI promises to provide a fundamental change in the digital world by making digital 
interactions trustful (ToIP, 2021). This paradigm presents sustainability, equity, freedom, liberty and 
digital inclusion when these ecosystems are adopted for different use cases, such as healthcare, digital 
voting and digital education (e.g., Zwitter et al., 2020; Houtan et al., 2020).  
Organizational and institutional outcomes: Adopting SSI is expected to simplify and automatize 
organizational processes, achieve cost savings, increase customer satisfaction and the reputation of the 
company. Furthermore, SSI can open up new business opportunities by developing innovations in form 
of new services, processes or business models. Thus, making digital trust a priority by adopting SSI is 
perceived as a new way to achieve competitive advantage in the market and stimulate customer 
retention, among others. 
Relational outcomes: SSI ecosystems provide an opportunity to form new strategic alliances and 
facilitate new ways of value creation and joint actions. Orchestrating and adopting SSI ecosystems 
enable networking, co-learning and building of long-term relationships among the actors. 
Individual outcomes: SSI ecosystems have the possibility to impact all our lives by providing a private 
and secure way of digital interactions. Their adoption might lead to higher job performance and trust in 
digital systems. Furthermore, orchestrating SSI ecosystems might result in passion at work, new 
knowledge and skills, better self-esteem and a sense of usefulness, among others.  
War of Wallets: The great technology companies (e.g., Apple, Microsoft) are also interested in 
developing SSI solutions (Forbes, 2020) that might further consolidate their power and influence. SSIs 
reportedly have the power to determine the future of the Internet by providing an opportunity to control 
what you can do, where you can go, and who you can be in your digital life (Reed, 2020). The War of 
Wallets–similarly to the War of Browsers (see, e.g., Wikipedia, 2020)— refers to a possibility of an 
impending war among different players on who will control our data (Reed, 2020; Evernym, 2020).  
Self-Sovereign Identity Ecosystems: Further Research Avenues 
Being a nascent concept, to achieve some of the potential benefits, SSI ecosystems require further 
investigation of a wide range of complex research issues from different viewpoints and theories. The 
elements of the model in Figure 1 as well as their interrelations suggest several intriguing research 
opportunities that we will describe next. First, the emergence of SSI widens our understanding on 
several concepts and creates a need to reinvestigate these. For example, IS researchers could focus on 
studying the concept of digital identity in different contexts (e.g., self-identity, personal identity, 
organizational identity, social identity; Whitley et al., 2014; Zwitter et al., 2020). Furthermore, 
researchers might focus on (re)defining SSI, digital identity, digital trust and related concepts (such as 

This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     11 
 
trusted interaction, trusted requirement, implicit trust, trusted processes, trust enablement, transitive 
trust and chain of trust), by studying, for example, the interplay of digital identifiers and personas (Wang 
and De Filippi, 2020) or the role of SSI in embedding trust into digital interactions (Grüner et al., 2020).  
There is also a need for research related to technical aspects of SSI ecosystems. The technical 
requirements, the architecture, design principles, testing suites, technical interoperability and 
abstracting interfaces that allows comparison, assessment and management of different solution 
architectures need to be elucidate (e.g., ToIP, 2021; Naik and Jenkins, 2020; Coelho et al., 2018). 
Researchers interested in data semantics could focus on “decentralized semantics”, i.e., how a data 
object within distributed ledger technology solutions represents a concept or object in the real world 
(ToIP, 2021). Related to the governance framework of SSI ecosystems, research is needed to investigate 
the governance architecture requirements, design principles, roles, responsibilities of actors, governing 
processes, the levels of trust, levels of assurance and the risks related to digital identity and verifiable 
credentials (ToIP, 2021). The horizontal interoperability of different ecosystems—specifying the 
architectural dependencies and requirements as well as the specific inner and joint governmental 
processes needed for interaction—is yet to be developed (ToIP, 2021). SSI creates an opportunity for 
innovative ideas and new markets around digital identity (e.g., identity insurance; Wang and De Filippi, 
2020). It also requires creating new business models and redefining the existing ones. Thus, there is a 
need for further research on the business aspects of SSI ecosystems, such as the revenue models and 
cost structures.  
More research is needed on the adoption of SSI ecosystems from different viewpoints. Researchers 
might focus on the feasibility, facilitating conditions, drivers, barriers, success metrics, and the impact 
of these ecosystem at different levels (individuals, organizations, industries, countries, etc.). Their 
market potential and the factors affecting mass adoption should be studied as well (Ondrus et al., 2015). 
Qualitative studies on SSI solutions from different domains (e.g., healthcare, education, IoT, online 
voting, supply chain, etc.) are also needed to increase our understanding on the diversity of aspects in 
SSI research area (ToIP, 2021; Zwitter et al., 2020). The emergence of SSI provides new aspects to 
study the digital and financial inclusion (Wang and De Filippi, 2020). Researchers could address the 
cultural aspects and the difference in the mental models, for example, from the decolonizing design 
theory perspective (e.g., Tlostanova 2017).  
One of the challenges that needs further research is related to ecosystem orchestration and operation. 
IS researchers focusing on ecosystems and collaborative economies could advance our understanding 
by investigating several issues, such as (1) factors impacting operational decision making (Muñoz and 
Cohen 2018), (2) roles in the ecosystem and the multilateral nature of relationships between them 
(Dedehayir et al., 2018; Kapoor, 2018), (3) processes for ecosystem orchestration and operation (e.g., 
Jacobides et al., 2018) and (4) the sustainability of these ecosystems (e.g., Sussan and Acs, 2017). 
Further research is needed also related to define the role of “de facto leader” of these ecosystems, for 
example, from microfoundational perspectives (Storbacka et al., 2016). Governance issues, such as the 
boundary problem of defining the actors (Allen and Berg, 2020), the accommodation of incompatible 
and often irreconcilable interests and values (De Filippi and Loveluck, 2016), the co-existence of 
informal and formal contracts (Allen and Berg, 2020), the interplay between machine readable and 
traditional governance mechanisms (Lumineau et al., 2020) and the dynamics of governance 
mechanisms and their mutual influence over time (Lumineau et al., 2020) should also be studied.  
There is a need to address SSI also from the value co-creation perspective. For example, researchers 
could study the different facets of value that these ecosystems enable, how different actors perceive it, 
and the co-creationary processes, such as resource integration and social interactions (Li and Tuunanen, 
2020; Rajala et al., 2015). Researchers could provide insights on how uncertainty could be mitigated 
and transformed into opportunities, for example, through the lens of digital innovations (e.g., Nylén and 
Holmström, 2015), entrepreneurship theories (e.g., Read and Sarasvathy 2012; Nambisan 2017) or 
design thinking (e.g., Luotola et al., 2017).  
Digital data provides novel forms of behavioral targeting for financial or other motives; however, the 
use of data as a capital impacts the liberty, autonomy, and well-being of individuals (Zuboff, 2015). 
There is an increasing concern related to surveillance abuses by governments where states might 
“govern by identity” (Whitley et al., 2014). SSI ecosystems provide a new aspect to the discussions 

This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     12 
 
related to the data as a capital and as a means for surveillance. Thus, researchers might further 
investigate these complex policy, legal and ethical issues considering the potential of SSI on fighting 
social injustice caused by asymmetrical personal data accumulation and analytics (Cinnamon, 2017). 
Privacy concerns, and the War of Wallets, could be studied from the viewpoint of the logic of 
accumulation in the surveillance economy (e.g., Zuboff, 2015; Cohen, 2018).  
Conclusions 
Based on this study, we define SSI ecosystems as innovation ecosystems describing the collaborative 
effort of a diverse set of actors towards innovation, such as (1) the infrastructure providers delivering 
a technology and governance dual framework and (2) various partner companies and end customers 
that provide complementary products and services as well as demands and capabilities. In SSI 
ecosystems, the trust among actors is established through peer-to-peer interactions between the issuers, 
verifiers and holders (i.e., the trust triangle). SSI solutions require conceptualization, such as defining 
the purpose, mission, context and boundary conditions. They consist of technology and governance 
architectures including the technological components and the business, legal and technical rules and 
policies, and these two frameworks should be developed hand in hand. SSI systems require 
orchestrating a collaborative ecosystem consisting of a set of actors with diverse, sometimes conflicting 
incentives (see, e.g., De Filippi and Loveluck, 2016). Their adoption requires fundamental changes in 
existing processes, new business models, and forming of new strategic alliances (see, e.g., Chen and 
Bellavitis, 2020).  
Several factors affect the characteristics, adoption and orchestration of SSI ecosystems. They reside in 
a highly uncertain environment characterized by high volatility, fast changes, and information 
asymmetry. The SSI market is fragmented, the standards are yet immature, and there is a legal and 
regulatory uncertainty. SSI ecosystems are strongly affected by the cultural and country characteristics 
that they reside in. Furthermore, the industrial characteristics shape their requirements as well as their 
perceived benefits and sacrifices. Finally, the organizational culture, the actors’ individual 
characteristics, and the expert communities, non-profit organizations and standard setting organizations 
play an important role in their structure and adoption. 
In certain cases, SSI holds the promise to provide trustful, simple, safe and private digital interactions. 
They facilitate innovations, cost savings and increase in job performance (Zwitter et al., 2020). They 
provide means to counteract money laundering, fraud and other economic crimes (Evernym, 2020). 
They might also provide an opportunity to hinder the oligopoly structure of today's Internet where 
digital identities and personal data are primarily managed by the "Tech Giants" (Der et al., 2017).They 
facilitate the formation of new strategic alliances and new forms of joint actions. However, several 
challenges are associated with their development and adoption, such as, technical immaturity, the lack 
of interoperability and standards, challenges related to ecosystem governance, lack of knowledge, 
information asymmetry, funding and legal issues, and the tension between the allocation of citizenship 
and “innate” individual rights (e.g., Prewett et al., 2019, Gstrein and Kochenov, 2020).  
Being a nascent technology, with the promise of building a trust layer into digital interactions, SSI and 
the ecosystems built around it claim for further studies. In particular, there is a need for further research 
related to the building blocks, adoption, orchestration and operation of SSI ecosystems. Some studies 
assess different SSI solutions (e.g., Naik and Jenkins, 2020); however, we lack work both from 
practitioners and researchers on the technical and governance requirements, the architecture, design 
principles and the interoperability, among others. In this paper, we propose further research avenues on 
different domains, such as digital trust, digital identity, identity management, ecosystems, digital 
innovations, value co-creation, open source communities and standard setting organizations, digital 
inclusion, and value-based selling. 
The limitations of the study are rooted in the limitations of the qualitative research approach. Further 
studies might investigate this domain by using other research methods, such as statistical methods, 
analytical methods or system dynamics. Furthermore, we acknowledge that the topic is rather new, 
developing fast and this might impact the validity of the results. To mitigate the possibility of this bias, 
we based our results on up-to-date sources both from scientific and grey literature in order to provide a 
state-of-the-art and state-of-practice overview of the SSI ecosystems.  

This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     13 
 
Acknowledgment. This research has been conducted in the APPIA research project in the Security And 
Software Engineering Research Center (S^2 ERC, 2020-21) and funded by Business Finland. We are 
grateful for all experts who contributed to this research by sharing their insights. 
References 
Allen, 
C. 
2016. 
The 
Path 
to 
Self-Sovereign 
Identity, 
URL: 
http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2016/04/the-path-to-self-soverereign-identity.html 
(visited 
in 
March 2021). 
Allen, D.W., and Berg C. 2020. ”Blockchain governance: What we can learn from the economics of 
corporate governance”. Available at SSRN. 
Cinnamon, J. 2017. Social injustice in surveillance capitalism. Surveillance & Society. 15(5), pp. 609–
625. 
Chen, Y., and Bellavitis, C. 2020. Blockchain disruption and decentralized finance: The rise of 
decentralized business models. Journal of Business Venturing Insights. 13, e00151. 
Coelho, P., Zúquete, A., and Gomes, H. 2018. Federation of attribute providers for user self-sovereign 
identity. 
Journal 
of 
Information 
Systems 
Engineering 
& 
Management. 
3. 
https://doi.org/10.20897/jisem/3943 
Cohen, J. E. 2018. The biopolitical public domain: The legal construction of the surveillance 
economy. Philosophy & Technology. 31(2), pp. 213–233. 
Creswell, J. W., Hanson, W. E. , Plano V. L. C., and Morales, A. 2007. Qualitative research designs: 
Selection and implementation. The Counseling Psychologist. 35(2), pp. 236–264. 
Darke, P., Shanks, G., and Broadbent, M. 1998. Successfully completing case study research: 
combining rigour, relevance and pragmatism. Information Systems Journal. 8(4), pp. 273–289. 
Davie, M., Gisolfi, D., Hardman, D. Jordan, J. , O’Donnell D., and Reed, D. 2019. The Trust over IP 
Stack. 
IEEE 
Communications 
Standards 
Magazine. 
3(4), 
pp. 
46–51. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MCOMSTD.001.1900029 
Davis, J. P. 2016. The group dynamics of interorganizational relationships: Collaborating with multiple 
partners in innovation ecosystems. Administrative Science Quarterly. 61(4), pp. 621–661. 
De Filippi, P., and Loveluck, B. 2016. The invisible politics of bitcoin: governance crisis of a 
decentralized infrastructure. Internet Policy Review. 5(4). 
Dedehayir, O., Mäkinen S. J., and Ortt, J. R. 2018. Roles during innovation ecosystem genesis: A 
literature review. 
Technological 
Forecasting 
and 
Social 
Change. 
136, 
pp. 
18–29. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.11.028 
Der, U., Jähnichen S., and Sürmeli, J. 2017. Self-sovereign identity $-$ opportunities and challenges 
for the digital revolution. arXiv preprint. arXiv:1712.01767. 
DID. 2021. Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) v1.0. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core (visited in 
March 2021). 
DIDComm. 2021. Aries RFC 0005: DID Communication. URL: https://github.com/hyperledger/aries-
rfcs/blob/master/concepts/0005-didcomm/README.md (visited in March 2021). 
DIF. 2021. Decentralized Identity Foundation. URL: https://identity.foundation/ (visited in March 
2021). 
Dunphy, P., and Petitcolas, F. A.  2018. A first look at identity management schemes on the blockchain. 
IEEE Security & Privacy. 16(4), pp. 20–29. 
Edmondson, A. C., and McManus, S. E. 2007. Methodological fit in management field 
research. Academy of Management Review. 32(4), pp. 1246–1264. 
Evernym. 
2020. 
The 
Future 
of 
Digital 
Wallets. 
URL: 
https://vimeo.com/473440729?width=640&height=480, (visited in March 2021). 
Forbes. 
2020. 
Apple 
Pay 
Was 
Not 
Disruptive 
But 
Apple 
ID 
Will 
Be. 
URL: 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidbirch/2020/08/29/apple-pay-was-not-disruptive-but-apple-id-
will-be/#556251104d0f (visited in March 2021). 
Grüner, A., Mühle, A., Gayvoronskaya, T., and Meinel, C. 2019. A comparative analysis of trust 
requirements in decentralized identity management. In: International Conference on Advanced 
Information Networking and Applications. pp. 200–213. Springer, Cham. 

This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     14 
 
Gstrein, O. J., and Kochenov, D. 2020. Digital Identity and Distributed Ledger Technology: Paving the 
Way 
to 
a 
Neo-Feudal 
Brave 
New 
World? 
Frontiers 
in 
Blockchain 
3(10). 
doi: 
10.3389/fbloc.2020.00010 
Gnyawali, D. R., and Park, B. J. R. 2011. Co-opetition between giants: Collaboration with competitors 
for technological innovation. Research Policy. 40(5), pp. 650–663. 
Houtan, B., Hafid A. S., and Makrakis, D. 2020. A survey on blockchain-based self-sovereign patient 
identity in healthcare. IEEE Access. 8, pp. 90478–90494. 
Hsieh, Y.-C., Lin, K. -Y., Lu C., and Rong K. 2017. Governing a sustainable business ecosystem in 
taiwan’s circular economy: the story of spring pool glass. Sustainability. 9, 1068. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su9061068 
Jacobides, M. G., Cennamo, C., and Gawer, A. 2018. Towards a theory of ecosystems. Strategic 
Management Journal. 39, pp. 2255–2276. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2904 
Kapoor, R. 2018. Ecosystems: broadening the locus of value creation. Journal of Organization 
Design 7(1). 12. 
Lacity, M. 2018. Addressing key challenges to making enterprise blockchain applications a reality. MIS 
Quarterly Executive 17. 
Lacity, M., Steelman, Z., and Cronan P. 2019. Blockchain governance models: Insights for enterprises. 
53. 
Ladner, D., Jensen, E. G., and Saunders, S. E. 2014. A critical assessment of legal identity: What it 
promises and what it delivers. Hague Journal on the Rule of Law, 6(1), pp.  47–74. 
Lemieux, V.L. 2017. In blockchain we trust? Blockchain technology for identity management and 
privacy protection. In Conference for E-Democracy and Open Government. 57. 
Li, M., and Tuunanen, T. 2020. Actors’ Dynamic Value Co-creation and Co-destruction Behavior in 
Service Systems: A Structured Literature Review. In: Proceedings of the 53rd Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. 
Locke, K. 2002. The grounded theory approach to qualitative research. In F. Drasgow & N. Schmitt 
(Eds.), The Jossey-Bass Business & Management Series. Measuring and analyzing behavior in 
organizations: Advances in measurement and data analysis. pp. 17–43. 
Lumineau, F., Wang, W., and Schilke, O. 2020. Blockchain Governance—A New Way of Organizing 
Collaborations? Organization Science. Forthcoming. 
Luotola, H., Hellström, M., Gustafsson, M., Perminova-Harikoski, O. 2017. Embracing uncertainty in 
value-based selling by means of design thinking. Industrial Marketing Management. 65, pp. 59–75. 
Moore, J. F. 1996. The Death of Competition: Leadership and Strategy in the Age of Business 
Ecosystems. Leadership. 
Morley, J., Cowls, J., Taddeo, M., and Floridi, L. 2020. Ethical guidelines for COVID-19 tracing apps. 
Nature. 582, pp. 29-31. doi: 10.1038/d41586-020-01578-0 
Mühle, A., Grüner, A., Gayvoronskaya, T., and Meinel, C. 2018. A survey on essential components of 
a self-sovereign identity. Computer Science Review. 30, pp. 80–86. 
Muñoz, P., and Cohen, B. 2018. A compass for navigating sharing economy business models. 
California Management Review. 61, pp. 114–147. https://doi.org/10.1177/0008125618795490 
Myers, M. D. 2009. Qualitative Research. Business & Management Sage Publications. London, UK. 
Nambisan, S. 2017. Digital entrepreneurship: Toward a digital technology perspective of 
entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. 41, pp. 1029–1055. 
Naik, N., and Jenkins P. 2020. Self-Sovereign Identity Specifications: Govern Your Identity Through 
Your Digital Wallet using Blockchain Technology. In 2020 8th IEEE International Conference on 
Mobile Cloud Computing, Services, and Engineering (MobileCloud). pp. 90-95. IEEE. 
Nylén, D., and Holmström, J. 2015. Digital innovation strategy: A framework for diagnosing and 
improving digital product and service innovation. Business Horizons 58(1), pp. 57–67. 
O'Mahony, S., and Karp, R. 2020. From proprietary to collective governance: How do platform 
participation 
strategies 
evolve?. Strategic 
Management 
Journal. 
pp. 
1–33. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.3150 
Ondrus, J., Gannamaneni, A., and Lyytinen, K. 2015. The impact of openness on the market potential 
of multi-sided platforms: a case study of mobile payment platforms. Journal of Information 
Technology. 30(3), pp. 260–275. 

This is the authors’ version of the work.  
This is a preprint of an article published in PACIS 2021 Proceedings 
 
Twenty-fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2021     15 
 
Ostern, N., and Cabinakova, J. 2019. Pre-prototype testing: empirical insights on the expected 
usefulness of decentralized identity management systems. In Proceedings of the 52nd Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences. 
Prewett, K.W., Prescott, G. L., and Phillips, K. 2020. Blockchain adoption is inevitable—Barriers and 
risks 
remain. 
Journal 
of 
Corporate 
Accounting 
& 
Finance. 
31, 
pp. 
21–28. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcaf.22415 
Read, S., and Sarasvathy, S. D. 2012. Co-creating a course ahead from the intersection of service-
dominant logic and effectuation. Marketing Theory. 12, pp. 225–229. 
Rajala, R., Töytäri, P., and Hervonen, T. 2015. Assessing Customer-Perceived Value in Industrial 
Service Systems. Service Science. 7(3), pp. 210–226. https://doi.org/10.1287/serv.2015.0108 
Reed, 
D. 
2020. 
Who 
Will 
Own 
The 
Wallet 
of 
the 
Future? 
URL: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bwsHW_QOM7k&list=PLXW4bzMu4rtEkubOi7467e2LqDK
z_5sLx&index=5&t=7s (visited in March 2021). 
Rossi, M., Mueller-Bloch, C., Thatcher J. B. , and Beck, R. 2019. Blockchain research in information 
systems: Current trends and an inclusive future research agenda. Journal of the Association for 
Information Systems. 20(9) 14. 
Sharon, T. 2020. Blind-sided by privacy? Digital contact tracing, the Apple/Google API and big tech’s 
newfound role as global health policy makers. Ethics and Information Technology. pp. 1–13. 
Shaikh, M., and Vaast, E. 2016. Folding and unfolding: Balancing openness and transparency in open 
source communities. Information Systems Research 27(4), pp. 813–833. 
Storbacka, K., Brodie, R. J., Böhmann, T., Maglio, P. P., and Nenonen, S. 2016. Actor engagement as 
a microfoundation for value co-creation. Journal of Business Research. 69, pp. 3008–3017. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.02.034 
Strauss, A. L., and Corbin, J. M. 1994. Grounded Theory Methodology. Handbook of Qualitative 
Research. 17(1), pp. 273–285. 
Sussan, F., and Acs, Z. J. 2017. The digital entrepreneurial ecosystem. Small Business 
Economics. 49(1), pp. 55–73. 
Töytäri, P., Brashear, A. T., Parvinen, P., Ollila, I., and Rosendahl, N. 2011. Bridging the theory to 
application gap in value‐based selling. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing. 26, pp. 493–
502. https://doi.org/10.1108/08858621111162299 
Tlostanova, M. 2017. On decolonizing design. Design Philosophy Papers. 15(1), pp.  51–61. 
TrustOverIP. 2021. TrustOverIP Foundation. URL: https://trustoverip.org/ (visited in March 2021). 
van Pelt, R., Jansen, S., Baars, D., and Overbeek, S. 2019. Defining Blockchain Governance: A 
Framework 
for 
Analysis 
and 
Comparison. 
Information 
Systems 
Management. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10580530.2020.1720046 
W3C. 2020. Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.0. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/ 
(visited in March 2021). 
Wang, F., and De Filippi, P. 2020. Self-sovereign identity in a globalized world: Credentials-based 
identity systems as a driver for economic inclusion. Frontiers in Blockchain. 2, 28. 
Whitley, E.A., Gal, U., and Kjaergaard, A. 2014. Who do you think you are? A review of the complex 
interplay between information systems, identification and identity. European Journal of Information 
Systems. 23(1), pp. 17-35. doi: 10.1057/ejis.2013.34 
Wikipedia, 2020. Browser Wars. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Browser_wars (visited in March 2021). 
Windley, 
P. 
2020. 
DIDComm 
and 
the 
Self-Sovereign 
Internet. 
URL: 
https://www.windley.com/archives/2020/11/didcomm_and_the_self-sovereign_internet.shtml 
(visited in March 2021). 
Zachariadis, M., Hileman, G., and Scott, S.V. 2019. Governance and control in distributed ledgers: 
Understanding the challenges facing blockchain technology in financial services. Information and 
Organization. 29(2), pp. 105–117. 
Zuboff, S. 2015. Big other: surveillance capitalism and the prospects of an information 
civilization. Journal of Information Technology. 30(1), pp. 75–89. 
Zwitter, A., Gstrein, O. J., and Yap, E. 2020. Digital identity and the blockchain: Universal identity 
management and the concept of the ‘self-sovereign’ individual. Frontiers in Blockchain, 3(26).  doi: 
10.3389/fbloc.2020.00026 
 
